So thank, thank you very much, Dr. Russell.
We do appreciate that. Please. Okay. Public.
So who we online? We got online? Okay.
Let's bring in animal justice Party R Row in New Zealand.
And, um, members, perhaps on the government side.
You can run a little roster. Yeah. Okay.
Don't stay, don't go too far away.
In case, in case they're playing mind games or no, no.
What would we do that given you my word? Monday afternoon.
Longer.
The good morning. Monday
afternoon's, not going past four o'clock.
Okay, good. Good morning. Thank you for your patience.
Sorry, we just had a big tax administration bill
that we were going through clauses by clause.
So welcome. We look forward to your submission, uh, on,
on the, um, uh, budget policy statement.
Thank you, uh, Kiata.
I'm Rob McNeil, co party leader of the Animal Justice Party,
and I'm proud to present one of the first ever comprehensive
budgetary submissions, asking Parliament to see
and provide substantially for non-human animals.
You can please take our submission as read,
but I would like to take just a few minutes to explain it,
hopefully with time for questions.
Over 95% of sentient beings and Al Tiea are not human.
They're pigs and Faron crates. Dogs and council pounds.
Cats poisoned on conservation land.
They can't vote, they can't submit to select committees.
They can't donate to political parties, but they can suffer
and they do every day with public money.
No taxation without representation says the slogan,
but their taxed with their lives and our indifference.
The government will spend close
to $150 billion this year in their budget.
The Animal Justice party has submitted to ask
for $63.5 million in baseline funding
to recognize animal sentence
and how we spend every public dollar.
That's 0.04% of the operating budget.
4 cents for every a hundred dollars to fundamentally shift
how New Zealand treats the majority
of sentient life in our care.
We have policies
and we love the environment ecosystems,
biodiversity metrics,
but we also speak up today for individuals, sentient beings
who feel pain, fear, and joy just like us,
and deserve justice in their own right.
We're not asking you to care about animals
because it's good for the planet, though it is.
We're not asking you to care
because Kiwis love their pets, though they do.
We're asking you to care that it's right
because a country that spends billions while ignoring the
suffering of 95% of sentient life is potentially failing.
Its most basic moral test
and animals are really good for your votes.
63.5 million creates an independent commissioner
for animals with teeth.
It establishes an animal justice fund.
It provides a million dollars
to ensure the transition for the ban on live.
Export a million dollars
to start a transition away from crawl factory farming.
6 million to to phase out endless.
10 80 aerial poisoning, 4 million for humane, feral cat
management and relocation.
Three and a half million for exotic pet regulation.
5 million to work on shade for animals, for farm animals,
and to stop mud farming.
$6 million to defend our season oceans.
3 million to to move councils from kill by default
to no kill by default pounds.
And we're not afraid to talk up the transition
for the affected parties.
$8 million for farmers to start
to look at moving away from animal agriculture.
2 million for communities transitioning
from recreational hunting.
5 million for laboratories moving to non-animal methods.
We're here to find solutions for all not to vilify.
And because humans don't vote,
we're shouting our policies from the rooftops
and hopefully offering a pathway forward for everyone.
We're asking for 7 million for a national vet care program
so families don't have to choose
between feeding their kids and saving their dogs.
And 5 million for the amazing rescue organizations
and sanctuaries for farm animals
that currently survive on donations
and constant volunteer burnout.
We'd also like you to look at half a million
for compassionate leave for when a companion animal dies.
'cause that grief is, is very real.
New Zealand prides itself on being progressive,
on leading the world in caring
and innovating policy, innovative policies
on punching above our weight.
And we are way behind Australia
on many of these animal issues.
We aerial poison more mammals per capita than
almost any nation on earth.
We factory farm a hundred plus million chickens in a year.
In conditions that would be illegal in the eu.
We kill thousands of healthy dogs and council pounds.
We drag nets through marine reserves
and call it sustainable.
We experiment on animals when alternatives exist,
and now we're adding beloved cats to the list of species.
We plan to poison endlessly doing it all with public money.
So don't act surprised if the world
eventually calls us hypocrites.
This committee has a choice,
and I appreciate our time here very much.
You can treat the submission like every other animal welfare
plea, not politely acknowledged concerns and change nothing.
Or you can recognize that we're offering a comprehensive
costed implementable framework for change.
We've done the work, we've got the numbers.
I'm a chartered accountant with long business experience.
I ran for Alame last year in the biggest New Zealand
electorate and got 7,000 votes.
You'll see us in November.
We're not asking for symbolic gestures.
We're demanding structural transformation.
Up to 40% of humans who refuse
to be evacuated in Hurricane Katrina and the US did so
because they couldn't take their animals with them.
So when you help animals, you're helping humans.
That means votes. Think about the votes you can get
with a few bucks for animals.
Think about the vote. So you'll lose by ignoring it.
$63.5 million to see the unseen, to protect the vulnerable.
To finally start to align New
Zealand's spendings with New Zealand values.
Animal Justice Party is here to speak up for the animals,
and please, we'd encourage you
to visit animal justice.org nz for more information.
Thank you. And I'm happy to take questions.
Okay, very good. Okay, I'm gonna go to Francisco Herandez.
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, I see here that you've got, um,
that you've got provisions here for establishing, um,
you know, emergency management, um, uh, funding request
for emergency management, um, protection for animals.
Um, one of the things that the new, um, um,
emergency management legislation will do is, um, you know,
require the incorporation of, um, you know,
animals into the that act.
Have you had a chance to go through there
and are you gonna be making a submission on that emergency?
We are making a submission separately on the emergency
management bill too, thanks to the question.
Okay. And welcome to the committee.
I see the business committee has confirmed your Oh,
your allocation here.
So wondering. Good. Okay. Todd Stevens,
Thank you. And thank you for your
submission and, um, congratulations.
You said your first one on the budget policy
statement, so great.
And you've outlined the co the spend that you'd like,
65 point, 63.5 million.
Um, have you given any thought to revenue measures?
Are you just wanting that money?
Um, you know, obviously you point out we've been about
150 billion, it's government, you just want that, um,
prioritized from other areas
or do you have any other, do you have any revenue measures
that you've thought about levies, et cetera, or,
Um, no, not specifically.
We haven't included that in the submission.
We'd be open to that.
What we're hope, really hoping is
for a national coordination on a lot of issues,
including issues that have traditionally been left
to say councils regarding dog pounds.
Um, we, we feel there's some overarching, uh, involvement
that's, that's needed, but certainly open to anything.
Obviously not, not up for using animals to generate revenue,
but any other revenue
suggestions would be, would be welcomed.
Okay, well, thanks. Okay,
Very good. Anything, anyone
else? No. Okay.
Thank you. Thank you so much. We're up.
I'm only at about seven minutes. We tend to get cut off.
I did just wanna say a really quick closing statement
and that's just a plea to all of the parties.
Come on, steal our, steal our stuff here.
Um, this will be really good for your votes out there.
Imagine how many votes you can get
by speaking up for animals.
We're looking for commitments and costs
and promises by parties, uh,
to do positive things for animals.
Um, in 10 years, people are gonna ask why it took so long,
why we kept poisoning, why we kept killing
and pounds, why we kept factory farming, why we watched HEC
and do hector's dolphins go extinct
and troll nets we could have banned.
And the answer hopefully isn't that
because it costs 0.004% of the budget.
And again, thank you very much for your time.
Okay. Oh, thank you. And we all look forward
to the SBCA also, um, uh, giving us a, uh,
marking all parties on their manifestos
and commitments to animal welfare
and the likes. So thank you. Mm-hmm.
Thank you. Okay. Fin cap.
We've got them scheduled next.
Liam, are they they're here in person. Very good.
We've got Jake flir,
we being CE Jake being Senior Policy Advisor.
Welcome. Thank you for your patience.
I know you've been in the building for some time.
Thank You. Welcome to our world. Thank you.
Um, and we look forward to your,
um, submission, so thank you. Thank you,
Thank you. Um,
you've introduced us. Thank you Cap.
And Jake Lily, our senior policy advisor.
Um, fin Cap supports financial mentoring across the country
and runs the Money Talks helpline.
You see at the bottom of most bills,
there are 762 financial mentors at
184 services across the country.
And you'll see in our submission
that financial mentoring is much more than just budgeting.
In 2025, the services in our reporting system were assisting
with 933 million of debt,
which is an increase of 510 million from 2021.
So the debts keep getting bigger
and more people are presenting with more complex is issues
as we approach half a decade of cost of living pressures,
fin cap's leading the TE TAPPA professionalization projects.
So financial mentors are equipped
to address the increasingly
complex hardship in front of them.
And MSD currently helps the sector by providing 19
and a half million in steady funding for
just 181
and a half, actually full-time equivalent financial mentors.
Um, 50 million is what we need to ensure
that anyone can access their financial mentor when they're
facing financial crisis.
44 Financial mentoring services previously funded
by MSD we're unsuccessful
with tenders in the last procurement round.
25 services have shut their doors over the last two years,
and we're also hearing from more
and more services with no option
but to close their doors soon, some
of them in isolated communities.
One service shared that
after losing their MSD funding, two
of their 11 staff decided to become volunteers
while four kept working for their communities while agreeing
to a reduced income.
So why do they keep doing such
stressful financial mentoring work in such circumstances?
We hear that people are presenting for support on some
of the worst days of their lives.
So I believe financial mentors keep going
because they see the turnaround,
their support makes some people's wellbeing
and they know how vital the work is.
The volunteering should be a bonus support
for the community, not something that we all rely on
for an absolutely vital essential service.
Financial mentoring is support at the top
of the cliff rather than an ambulance at the bottom.
So when finances fall apart and support isn't
provided, mental health, physical health
and social dysfunction issues are exacerbated
putting pressure on the health system
and other government functions.
So as we submit, we need parliament help us
to establish ongoing industry contributions
to financial mentoring as well
as an increase in our government funding.
So energy companies, telecoms companies, financial services,
especially KiwiSaver providers
and the gambling industry, all benefit from refer to
and create work for financial mentors.
So a small levy on them can make up the gap so
that financial mentors can focus on their work
for the community and professionalization.
Just before I pass over to Jake, I'll leave you
with this finding from a 2019 Simplicity report.
Um, NZX 50 listed companies trail well
behind other developed countries in corporate philanthropy
giving on an average 0.07%
of pre-tax profits.
And that's compared to 1.75% for SE 100 companies in the uk.
1.69% for large companies in the US
and, uh, 0.59% for Australia's 50 largest companies.
Um, so we trail well behind. Got you Jack.
Uh, financial mentors often say to us, takes minutes
to get into debt, takes months to get out.
Mm-hmm. And that really reflects all
that time they're putting in with people
to truly understand the financial position,
what the opportunities are to go from there.
Uh, and we know one in eight people walking in the door, uh,
looking at a KiwiSaver hardship, uh,
application at the moment.
Uh, we've got an open survey at the moment,
and so far it's showing an average of 41%
of financial mentors time is being spent assisting
with KiwiSaver hardship applications.
Uh, recently I spoke to financial mentor.
He said when he does help someone go through with
that application, it takes around eight hours.
That's eight hours that the provider is saving, not having
to work with that customer on getting that application in.
They're also saving because it's likely,
it's a really accurate application,
it won't be resubmitted multiple times.
Uh, they also save
and we all save in situations
where a financial mentor helps someone find a different
solution and not draw it down on their retirement savings.
Mm-hmm. Uh, we also see other companies benefiting
where people do really need that money out
of their qwi saver and those other creditors get paid.
Uh, we also know when the, uh, creditors refer
to financial mentors, they end up getting paid as well.
Last year when the banks referred to us, uh,
the data in our system said that debt repayments increased
by $39 from the first last session
with the financial mentor, um, their inter national models
for industry levies.
Just to list two, uh oh, sorry.
In industry contributions, um, in the UK
for some time there has been a living on financial services.
It's 152 million pounds in the most recent round
that was levied and and put towards the equivalent
sector in Australia.
The government invested one
and a half million dollars into a fund, uh,
where contributions are made
voluntarily by industry at the moment.
And that has had some success.
There's 22 million to be granted out
to our equivalent industry over the next three years.
Uh, but obviously it's a lot of investment
and a lot of administration resources to get to that point.
So we really favor going down the route of a, a levy system,
which would be much fairer.
We know some businesses would voluntarily contribute
to financial mentoring, but it may be unfair
or we might never get to that scale.
We need to actually keep things sustainable on the ground.
Uh, and I guess also to important to note is
that in the UK it is very clear that no less than half
of the contribution towards our
equivalent is made by government.
There is still a place for
government to fund in there as well.
Um, and when we look at our stats, the Ministry
of Social Development's, the largest creditor in our system.
Um, debt to government are three out
of every 10 debts in the system.
Uh, and those referred by calling order increase their debt
repayments, which is likely helping people stay in housing.
Um, I also spoke
to someone the other day at an unfunded service in Auckland.
They're getting one to two referrals a day
where they're helping someone with their housing budget
to try and get into the housing support.
So financial mentors are vital to our communities.
There's a gap of over 30 million
and steady funding for financial mentoring.
This, this is best filled by small levies on industry
who benefit from financial mentoring
and their customers benefit too.
And getting ongoing regular funding means
that our experienced financial mentors can get
to work helping their communities rather than burning time,
making piecemeal funding
applications to try and keep their doors open.
Thank you for your time and really welcome Any questions.
Okay. I'm gonna go to Ena Williams here.
Um, thank you very much for both of you for coming in
and presenting to us today.
Um, why is there an 88% increase in the number
of people seeking help who earn more than a thousand
dollars across your mentors?
And what are you noticing about people, um,
in more comfortable situations on more personal debt
that's not skewed against their home?
I think when we looked at the data on that, we saw a lot
of people had difficulty over the last recent years
and got into more debt.
Um, some job losses in their, uh,
I guess people going for KiwiSaver hardship
and then being referred over to financial mentors
to make sure that that is the actual right option,
getting on top of everything.
So a real range of issues.
Uh, when you've pointed to, uh, industry players
who could be contributing to a levy, is that
because you're seeing a growing, um, personal debts
and things like telco
and um, say car loans that weren't, um,
trending in that way 10 years ago?
I think we've definitely seen telco come up.
Energy's always been a bit persistent.
Um, bank debts have grown
and you know, you really
have, there's a bit of nuance there.
'cause obviously when a home loan comes
into the system, it's quite large.
But we are hearing from financial mentors,
it's one in 10 people now present with a home loan,
which is a lot more than the past,
and it's more that they're presenting about the home loan
rather than it just being part
of their wider financial situation.
Just finally, um, your case numbers have grown, um,
over the last year, um, in a year
that financial mentors have received less funding from the
government and that a number of services
have become unfunded.
Um, how should the government be responding to this trend
where more and more people are accessing financial
support from your services?
Well, in our view, I think there's a, there's room
for the government to provide more in the way of, um,
funding to, to match, um, you know,
at least half of the demand.
And then we'd really like the government's support
to help us set up this, um, industry funds and,
and really put pressure on industry as well to,
to do their part so that we can overall get to a place
that will, um, be sustainable for the sector going forward.
Okay. In the interest of time, I'm gonna go to Dan.
Thank you very much for coming before us.
And sorry I wasn't able to meet you the other day.
Um, just keen to understand Fin cap's, um,
relationship with, you know, small budget providers
and, you know, service providers.
So I'm guessing you, you, you are more the train the trainer
With it or we, we effectively act
as the umbrella body or the peak body Yeah.
For the, all of the financial mentoring services
who are affiliated with us.
Yes. That is the bulk of them around. Wonderful.
What can you tell me about the, um, the satisfaction
or the, the, the relationship that you have
with the providers, um, what kind
of feedback you are getting from them about, you know,
positive or negative around, you know,
fin cap's relationship.
And I guess what I'm under trying
to understand is what's Fin Cap doing really well
with service providers?
What it may be your areas for improvement?
Mm. As an organization.
Yeah, guess. Um, we do get there, there is a lot
of strain from a lot of services that are unfunded.
The majority of services was that are affiliated
to us at the moment are unfunded.
So there is some frustration there.
And obviously we are here looking
to make the case for that funding.
'cause they know, I mean, their services continue
to stand up as Flo has said,
because they can see the need in their community.
Um, and a lot of people making a lot of sacrifice.
So I do worry about people burning out from the amount
they're doing voluntary work with.
Some of them used to be paid.
Um, so we do get some feedback, you know, like all peaks
and, and the peak before us that we could do more.
Um, but I think there's, there's a lot of support
and we're really working with people on the
professionalization project looking at is this really
sustainable, relying on volunteers in the space
where we're seeing so many more mental health
presentations coming alongside money difficulty. Yeah.
Mm-hmm. And in terms of the services that we provide
to support the financial mentors, we do six monthly
satisfaction surveys, um, based on our, our training, our,
um, client VO voices, which is the data management system.
We provide our policy work, et cetera.
And they tend to come back very positively.
Yeah. Yeah. No, great.
Thank you for, okay, last question, Ryan.
Just a quick one to actually, um, I guess, um, try
and help pick up what you're putting down.
Would you be able to, to the committee
after this po potentially
what you talk about levying different
industries that are relevant.
Could you give us a one pager on what that might look like,
what other jurisdictions do so that we can, you know,
have something tangible to,
to see if it's something we could advocate for?
Absolutely. Absolutely. Yeah.
Yeah, no, thank you. And you know how to get through
to the Clark's office and
that can be distributed if we don't mind a little bit
of homework, but that would be very useful and interesting.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you much.
Thank you Howard and Jake Lily for coming in.
Keep up the good work. Okay.
That takes us, uh,
to Rob Collins on Zoom from all the way from Sunny Albany,
um, north Harbor Budgeting services incorporate,
we have got a little bit of buffer members just while we
wait, um, to make sure you get to question time
and reasonable shape and reasonable time.
Promise. IE no need
to run down
the, which is not working.
That's a big promise.
Apologies you've got Claudette Wilson from nor, but,
but we are waiting for Rob Collins to come on.
Who's the chairperson? So do
You want, are you able to make a start?
Claudette we're just, yes. I we we're running ti
running late, my apologize.
Appreciate that. No, no, no,
we apologize to you. So welcome.
Um, we're obviously having a bit of technical issues, so,
um, with, um, the limited time we've got available to us,
I want to make some brief opening remarks, um,
but leave the bulk of our time
to you asking us any questions.
Um, we know from our work that thousands of clients that,
that the economy is in a rough position with interest rates,
unemployment and inflation going in the wrong direction.
Um, we believe in the context of dealing
with financial hardship in our communities.
The government has failed.
It's too late for offense at the top of the cliff.
We need first responders at the bottom of the cliff.
Having said that, we understand the need for fiscal
restraint that is after all our bread and butter.
But as we tell our clients, you need
to prioritize to the here and now.
Um, getting the balance right is difficult,
but the balance should be guided by what is right
and with compassion.
Too much of the current government spending is being
directed to the nice to haves
rather than the immediate needs of our communities.
The financial mentoring sector is substantially underfunded.
If the economy was at a place
where all the indicators showed a prosperous,
thriving nation, we could agree with the sensibility
of the current policies, but it's not,
and I cannot emphasize enough, the direct link
between financial hardship
and poor mental needs, uh, sorry.
And the poor mental health
and domestic violence in our community.
In response, the government wants a free ride.
It takes our services,
but is not prepared to meet even a portion of their costs.
Policies and programs are piecemeal without
any overriding plan,
without properly funded budgeting services.
The government is shifting risk
and responsibility onto our communities
who are already stretched to breaking point.
This is an equitable, we strongly urge you
to pri reprioritize spending so
that the most financially vulnerable
and sufferers of poor mental health
and violence in the home get the opportunity
to take back control of their lives.
We are experts of budgeting and financial literacy.
Why would you deny people
and hardship access to those skills?
Thank you. And I'm happy to answer some questions.
Okay. Thank you, Claudette.
I don't, Rob's not there at the moment by the look of it.
Um, no questions. That's all right.
Well, we will just carry on.
Uh, Dr. Wilson, did you have a question? Yeah.
Um, are you a member of Finca?
So we are, there is no affiliation to Fin Cap,
but we work with Fin Cap
and I am actually a fin cap trainer.
Okay, thank you. Okay, good.
Any, any, anything else members?
Okay, well that's loud and clear Claudette.
So thank you for coming in regards on to Rob
and, um, uh, we appreciate your appearing
before us this morning and your
Patience. I just follow up with one small
thing really quickly.
Yep. No, of course. And Family violence
and elder abuse very quickly.
I mean, we've got a client at the moment that
has serious threats of life and housing.
She's been navigating complex legal and financial systems
and, um, has not been off, um, able to, um,
reach agreements.
Ongoing shared financial arrangements with former partners.
Partner has broken down
and despite continued efforts, she is
in a difficult position.
From a budgeting perspective,
the focus has been on supporting the client to feel safe,
stable, and less overwhelmed.
Being required to relocate with their children,
place significant pressure on her income, housing costs,
and day-to-day living expenses.
Access to a safe
and supportive office environment has been especially
important, allowing her to engage in a pace, at a pace
that she feels comfortable and,
and rebuilt her confidence and trust.
Through consistent budgeting, support
and guidance with trusted mentors, the client has been able
to better understand her options,
take more practical steps towards regaining control
of your finances, while longer term legal matters.
Continue. This work is most effective when it's
done not in isolation.
Ongoing collaboration between budgeting services,
legal housing
and social services helps ensure the client is supported in
a coordinated way while minimizing further stress
or re-traumatizing as she navigates complex systems.
This client is proactive
and engaged despite significant mental stress,
but advocacy from a budgeting service has been required
to support her time taken to date with budgets,
money management tools, advocacy, et cetera,
approximately 18 hours
and we are unfunded, so it's free.
Thank you Claudette.
And thank you for always taking the opportunity to,
to advocate strongly something we
really appreciate around here.
So thank you for your time today.
Thanks Claudette, and thanks for our best. Thank you. Okay.
That takes us to save the children.
Have we got, um, Jackie Salley here? Yes, Gilda.
Oh, thanks for coming in, Jackie. Thank you.
Thanks for your patience. We're almost catching up to time.
So problem. Thank you. You've got 10 minutes.
Thank you. Kilda Kda Koto called Jackie Sly talk,
nor Todd writes Advocacy
and research director for Safety Children New Zealand.
Save the Children welcomes the opportunity
to share our submission on the budget policy statement 2026.
And our submission is supported
by the Children's Rights Alliance in New Zealand.
Save the Children was funded in 1919
and is world's leading independent
organization for children.
We work in 120 countries around the world to save
and improve the lives of children, including here in ol
where we were founded in 1997.
We worked to uphold the rights
of children both in New Zealand and overseas.
Save the Children encourages a child rights approach
to prioritize children in New Zealand's annual budget
to invest in and deliver on rights
for children, for all children.
Ino, we recognize that New Zealand is experiencing a long
and protracted downturn while signs
of recovery are positive.
Aldo continues to navigate higher living costs,
which are particularly challenging for low income.
Data from a range of sources shows that family,
families on the lowest incomes are
deeply infected by the cost of living.
And this downturn, we are concerned
that child poverty rates have increased
across all three measures.
Food and housing insecurity is impacting the health
and wellbeing of children and whanau.
Children and whanau with disabilities are living in severe
hardship and facing unacceptable levels
of social deprivation.
Youth are bearing the brunt of rising unemployment rates
and crimes against children need urgent attention.
Budget 2026 provides a critical opportunity
to address these issues.
Families and groups of New Zealands, that New Zealanders
that continue to struggle, including wana with disabilities,
w Maori Pacifica families
and families reliant on welfare can be greater supported,
should increase financial investment,
be allocated and budget.
2026. We make several recommendations.
One is to take a child rights approach to budgeting
for children and prioritize spending
and investment that supports the rights development
and wellbeing of children to live good lives now
and have bright futures to look forward to.
We call for increased visibility
of government budget allocations to children.
So it is clear how children's development needs
and rights are prioritized
and enabled through government investment.
The advancement of children's rights in Aldo
and New Zealand for all children cannot be achieved without
the mobilization of adequate financial resources.
We recommend the government conducts
child impact assessments.
We are making budgetary decisions
that significantly impact children
and their families, such as benefit income levels,
limitations to access, benefit incomes
and related supports, social service,
budget allocations including education, health
and justice, public transport services that are safe,
reliable, and affordable,
and support for children to participate in recreational
activities or participate in their communities.
We call for the prioritization of lifting the incomes
of those earning the list in terms of lifting incomes,
we call on the government to prioritize supporting those to,
with the lease, to have enough money
to cover the necessities of life,
but also to engage in their communities
and have a decent standard of living with their housing,
food, security, energy, health and education needs met.
Lifting the incomes of disabled peoples
and families of children with disabilities must be
prioritized on every poverty measure.
Children with disabilities are struggling the most
and increased risk of serious harm,
and seven times more likely
to require care from Ang tamari than non-disabled children.
Clearly, our systems
and investment levels to support disabled children
and whanau are failing.
Third, we recommend
that we ensure children have increased opportunities
to engage in and grow their cultural, sporting
and artistic interests and talents.
We call for increased funding to support better,
to better support
and allow children from low income whanau
to engage in sports arts and culture.
Investing in employment
and training opportunities for young people should also be a
priority of budget 2026.
We are concerned that youth unemployment rates continue
to rise, as does the proportion of youth,
not unemployment training or education.
Investing in the social determinants of health
to lift the health and wellbeing
of New Zealanders is critical.
A trajectory of healthy children to healthy adults leading
to a lower burden of health in the long term,
is reliant on government investment.
These are intentional outcomes that can be achieved
with adequate government funding.
Food and housing security are both essential
to deliver improved health incomes.
People of all ages need healthy food, warm
and healthy homes, clean drinking water
and healthy environments along with access
to quality healthcare when they need it.
Access to these resources is even more crucial for children.
Children who suffer poor health can carry the burden
of poor health throughout their lifetimes.
And our final recommendation is preventing
and eliminating crimes against children.
The BPS in the BPSA priority of the government is
to restore law and order.
We call on the New Zealand government to consider the impact
of crimes against children and young people.
And that specific focus is given to the elimination
of crimes against children.
Too often children are considered within the concept
of restoring, are not considered within.
The concept of restoring law
and order crimes against children often fall into the
category of fa family harm.
And we are concerned that framing crimes against children
as harm fails to capture the reality
of criminal offending against them.
Additionally, due to limited data
and reporting with a specific focus on children,
children are largely invisible.
However, it is deeply concerning that the data
and reporting available shows that children are victims
of extremely serious and violent crime.
In the past decade, approximately at least 113 children
under the age of 17 were killed by homicide
around one child every four to five weeks.
The majority, two thirds
of these were under five years of age.
It is unacceptable that New Zealand is one of the high,
has one of the highest rates compared with similar countries
of children under five years of age being killed
by homicide in plain language.
Crimes against children are serious
and increasing according to insights from five years
of data from the New Zealand Crimes
and Victims survey, young people, 15
to 25 year olds are the most vulnerable age group
for nearly every crime in Alor.
An important limitation of the survey is
that children under 15 years are not included.
So again, it is difficult to fully ascertain the rates
of children that are victims of crime.
Too often the focus is on young people committing crime,
and while it is important to understand
and respond to youth crime, this could mean
that crimes against children are overlooked.
That concludes our submission
and I'm happy to take any questions.
Thank you. Have you ever, um, thank you j have you,
have you advocated as far as that New Zealand Crimes
and Victims survey?
That that, uh, yes.
The 15 to 25 year olds are the most vulnerable aged group.
Um, but have you advocated for those under 15 for
that demographic to also be reported in that survey?
Uh, yes. We've asked for greater, uh,
data collection on children.
That specific survey has been brought up.
We're part of the convention monitoring group convened
by the Children's Commissioner
and at the DCE levels that has been discussed with, uh,
the officials at that, at that table.
And as part of, uh, alternative submissions
to the committee on the rights of the child, uh, the request
for data has been called for
and that has been recommended
by the committee on the rights of the child to the government.
And so this survey does highlight that Yeah,
children are not included.
Generally we ask for greater inclusion
and, uh, as part of our work, we, we keep
to, to call for that
Continue. Okay. Thank you. And, and thank you for
your very, um,
substantive written submission.
Any other questions? Um, Francisco Hermanez.
Uh, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair.
Um, I'm really interested in how you wrote in the,
your submission around how the, um, commercialization
of course, especially in tertiary education, um,
entrenches inequality and increasing student deadness.
Um, have you,
I'm not sure that was our submission actually.
Was it not in No.
Oh, that's right. It's in the subsequent submission.
Apologies. That's right. No problem. That's all right.
So this is good. This is when you know
that the the person presenting their
own submission Yes, true.
Absolutely. And that they're being read. So that's
Also, hey, so you put a lot of work into that,
so thank you and thank you for your advocacy.
Any, any other comments minute members?
I've got, sorry, just, just one question.
Um, in regards to child poverty
and the shift away from the conventional census model,
there's been concerns expressed that some measures
of child poverty may be missed as a result of that.
Have you got any thoughts about the impacts
that could have on the work you are able to do?
Well, our work relies on good data.
So the quality of the data speaks
to the quality of the advocacy.
So if we know what we're talking about, we know
what we can ask for, and we can know
what solutions we can recommend, um, across the board,
data is essential, particularly when it comes to children.
And we know that there are gaps and that is clear.
Um, census is one place, uh, collection of, um,
data when there's an emergency is another place.
For example, child data for children
and emergencies is not collected.
So we advocate strongly
and many for a, for better collection of data
so we can understand poverty levels.
And because it's not just understanding the level, it's
what other solutions and what do those solutions look like
and how can they be implemented?
Uh, and we know that New Zealand has a,
has a problem with child poverty.
That's why there's a Child Poverty Reduction Act,
and there's a bipartisan agreement to that.
And we fully advocate for all resources to be put in place
so that, you know, we can achieve, um,
eradicating poverty in New Zealand.
It is possible we're, we're a rich and flourishing country.
Absolutely. Thank you. Thank you Jackie, again
for your written and, um, oral submission for coming in.
Okay. Members, members,
we've got the Child Poverty Action Group on Zoom, Gary, she,
and we've got Francisco, her Menez,
who's got the first question once he's presented.
Okay. Good morning. Thank you for your patience.
You've got 10 minutes.
Uh, we look forward to your presentation.
I'm Dr. Yeshi from Child Poverty Action Group.
I mahi centers us on research
and advocacy to end child poverty and ot.
So recently budget policy statements have been framed
as exercises in fiscal discipline,
but our message to this committee is simple.
The physical discipline exercise in this B-C-B-P-S doesn't
just fail to reduce child poverty.
It structurally increases it.
So we see this happening through three mechanisms,
silent cuts to families funding, cliffs, and education,
and the math problem of the operating allowance.
So first, let's look at the silent cuts to income support.
We call it silent because it happens through inaction.
It is not announced. It happens when you freeze thresholds.
While deliver cost of living climbs,
our submission highlights a stuck reality right now.
A couple with one child of both working off full-time
or minimum wage effectively,
it earns too much to keep their support.
They lose their family tax credit,
they lose their best start tax credit.
And that is up to $11,000
of support taken away from a working family simply
because thresholds haven't moved.
At the same time, the Ccommodation supplement has seen zero
increase while rent keep rising by indexing benefits
to CPI rather than wages
and freezing in these thresholds, you erode the safety net.
You are pushing families off the support they need despite
trying their best in a tough economic period.
So you don't need to actively cut support to her families.
Inflation is doing the cutting for you.
The second mechanism is the education funding cliff
that we identified.
This is where the state saves money
by shifting costs onto the family.
Our modeling identifies a severe deficit,
particularly in early childhood and tertiary education.
When government funding flatlines against rising costs
and deficit doesn't disappear, it transforms.
It becomes higher fees for parents.
It becomes reduced hours for children
and becomes higher debt
for students and the tertiary sector.
We're seeing a user pay by stealth model.
We are here for high school students who are scared
to study because of the cost.
Figure five and submission proves they're right.
Student borrowing for living costs has exploded
while effectively asking the poorest students
to borrow their way through a cost of living crisis.
This forces a choice.
Does education equalize opportunity
or does it entrench in quality?
Saving money on baselines today ensure we pay for it later
and reduce workforce participation
and intergenerational debt.
Lastly, I need to speak to the operating allowance.
We view this as the math problem of the budget.
The limit of $1 billion for new spending.
Create a mathematical impossibility
for your statutory child poverty targets.
We know the cost of standing still just maintaining services
against inflation consumes the vast majority of the islands.
Looking at the numbers for 2026, just keeping the lights on
for ECE and tertiary education will take
20% of that new spending.
By 2027, it takes 50%.
If standing still takes up the whole room,
there's zero fiscal headroom left.
There's no money left for the wealth transfer necessary
to lift children out of poverty.
Under these settings,
the targets in the Child Poverty Reduction Act are
unachievable while essentially planning to fail.
So to conclude, we asked this committee to recognize
that child poverty is not inevitable.
It is a policy choice
and we recommend the four immediate shifts
to change the trajectory.
First, stop the silent cuts, adjust income support
to adequate levels, and index 'em to wages, not just CPI.
This extends to abatement thresholds of various schemes
from the public services.
Fix the base baseline in education to stop privatization
of costs onto struggling families.
Three, increase the operating allowance to a level
that supports progress towards urgent issues such,
such, such as child poverty.
And lastly, revenue reform.
If operating allows too small to meet the law,
we must look at per progressive revenue tools like wealth
tax, inheritance tax,
and capital gains tax, we cannot cut our way out of poverty.
Thank you. And I'm happy to take any questions. Alright,
Thank you very much. Um,
Dr. Xi, we're gonna go to Francisco Jimenez.
Thank you chair. Um, thank you for your submission
and apologies for the mistaking identity.
Uh, earlier, um, your submission, which he referred to the,
um, the commercialization of course,
especially in tertiary education.
Um, are you referring to the, um,
increase in fee maxima from two to 6%?
Is that one of the things that you're seeing in terms
of increase increasing the
commercialization of tertiary education?
Yeah, so there's multiple things
going on in the tertiary agreement.
So we see from the, um, BPS
and the numbers, the baseline estimates for this year
and going forward, there's a immediate, uh,
deficit in meeting
or keeping 2025 tuition subsidies, um, at the equal level
for the years going on for it.
So in order for tertiary or universities
or politics to maintain their level of education,
they either they had, they're forced
to restructure in some ways, whether
that's increasing tuition costs, um, asking the user
to pay more or somehow, um, cut costs by reducing the kind
of services or the staff level so
that all have a negative impact on how, um, the, the level
of education and the,
the quality education students receive.
And there's the other level which there's
impact on household, right?
When the tuition fee that you have to pay increases, um,
that increases, potentially increases the level of debt
that student have to take on to go through education.
And that also, um, put a financial restraint of family
who want, who wishes to support their children's study going
to university, but may not do so,
or that they might not, um, the money they have been given
to support their rent or their living costs is now going
towards tuition fee.
And as a effect that's, uh,
students in university are forced to, uh,
meet their living costs by either borrowing, using the, uh,
living costs scheme or some, some other ways.
Thank you. Okay. Right.
I think we'll, we'll, we'll have
to leave it there, but thank you.
Thank you so much for your, um, uh, written submission
and for appearing before the committee, um, today, Dr. She
Got it.
Thank you. Okay.
That leaves us to our last, um, submitter for this section.
Um, Andy Oakley's on Zoom for an individual submission
of five minutes.
Hi, can you hear me? Good morning, Andy.
Thank you for your patience.
And, um, thank you for your very, uh, substantive, um, uh,
submission that you've sent in.
Uh, we look forward to your, uh, five minute presentation.
We're in your hands. Thank you.
Well, thank you chair and members
of the Finance expenditure committee for the opportunity
to speak to my submission on reforming New Zealand's Public
Finance Act 1989 through modern monetary theory principles,
my paper proposes amendments to parts one through six
of the PFA to shift from neoliberal debt myths
to a resource focused framework
that promotes full employment and sustainable growth.
Sovereign governments like New Zealand's, create fiat money
through spending, not borrowing like households.
Deficits aren't a burden.
They're essential
for injecting net financial asset assets
into the private sector.
Without them. Private money created by banks
through loans leaves the economy in deficit driving
speculation and crises.
My amendments reflect this in part six,
I emphasize currency issuance over mandatory borrowing,
treating bonds as optional tools
for interest rate management
and viewing debt as private sector assets.
Double double entry bookkeeping shows financial assets
and liabilities always balance to zero system wide.
Government spending boosts private net worth worth while
taxes create demand for the currency
and concur private net worth to manage inflation.
This seashore ensures stability
deficits create positive equity
for households and businesses.
In part two, I reframe fiscal principles around this
focusing on inflation from
resource overuse rather than debt ratios
with mandated assessments of labor and capacity.
Private money is credit based,
but governments can run central bank overdrafts without
penalties, selling bonds if needed to absorb reserves.
Spending can fund welfare like healthcare
and education sustainably.
Shifting from historical austerity priorities,
my changes in part three, four
and five require reporting on labor metrics
and resource efficiency, prioritizing productive outcomes
over scarcity myths.
Neoclassical economics often ignores these realities leading
to economic gaslighting that fuels society burnout
through austerity widening inequality in New Zealand since
the 1980s reforms, for instance,
the Ruth Ansia reforms
of the early 1990s exemplified this by slashing welfare
deregulating labor markets,
and privatizing a assets which drove short-term
economic recovery, but exacerbated poverty, unemployment,
and social divisions that persist today.
So it's clear that austerity over abundance is a choice made
by ill-informed politicians.
These reforms enable proactive policies,
job guarantees zero interest home loans
and reversing privatization to end wealth extraction.
If you're concerned with debt,
the central bank could buy all bonds,
eliminating debt fairs,
allowing deficits for the public good.
This counters pro-cyclical cuts fostering resilience.
I'd welcome your questions in the remaining time.
Okay. Uh, thank you very much Mr. Oakley.
I've got Dr. Wilson for a question.
Uh, thank you for your submission, Andy.
Um, just wondering whether you, uh, believe
that the large scale asset program, uh,
instituted into the last government, uh, is part of
modern monetary theory,
and secondly to that, how do we treat debt
and how does the IMF view this debt?
Well, it's the term debt that's the problem.
Um, it comes from neoclassical thinking, um, in actual fact
what the government's doing when it issues fiat currency.
And remember the word fiat means a decree by authority.
This allows the government to spend into the economy, uh,
providing infrastructure
and assets to the, um, to the, to the public sector.
So, um, yes,
spending into infrastructure is modern monetary theory.
And remember, modern monetary theory is just a lens placed
on top of the current system.
It's not a new system.
It's the same system that that we have now.
Okay, we'll, we'll leave it at that. Thank you so much Mr.
Oakley for, uh, appearing before us
and for your written submission.
Thank you. Okay. Me members, that draws to a close.
We're gonna come back, budget policy statement,
um, at about midday.
Um, we'll just have, we'll just have a 92nd break
and, uh, then we'll go on to Adrian at Blink Pay.
Uh, and then we've got the Reserve Bank, uh,
and the mb uh, for open appearances as far part
of our banking inquiry catch up six months on.
So, um, we will resume in, uh, a couple of minutes.
Thank you.
Good.
Okay. Live transmission has resumed.
Okay. So we have got, um,
Adrian Smith here on Zoom from, uh, blink Pay.
Welcome Adrian.
Thank you for coming back on our six monthly, uh, follow up
to our, uh, banking inquiry.
Uh, we look, thank you for your submission
and we look forward to, um, uh, some q
and a with you over the next 10 minutes or so.
Thank Cameron minutes. Excellent, Adrian.
So good morning. I'm Adrian Smith, CEO of bling pay.
Thank you for the opportunity to update you on open banking
and payments competition New Zealand.
We have identified three critical friction points
that are signed competition right now.
And I'm pulling, these can be fixed without new legislation.
First realtime payments.
We believe realtime payments are possible today using
existing open banking infrastructure.
We intend to prove this through a proof of concept
with BNZ this quarter.
The goal of expanding to all major banks,
which would give approximately 95% coverage
of bank to New Zealanders.
The BNZ proof of concept is designed
to generate empirical evidence
and data that demonstrates this capability is viable right
now, not years away.
As we move faster, we also need to design fraud liability,
consumer protections with equal priority
because in a real time network, fraud happens in real time
too, which is the big challenge.
Second payments New Zealand governments,
we support the work payments New Zealand does,
but as regulated fintechs emerged,
there's a perception risk,
which has been discussed earlier today when incumbent
incumbent banks hold all the shares.
Simple fixes like a former non-bank board seat
or transparent consultation frameworks,
which strengthen confidence without
disrupting the current model.
Third merchant onboarding delays.
Right now, merchants who want
to adopt open banking payments are stuck waiting weeks
for bank dependent processes.
Standardizing merchant onboarding expectations would
unlock adoption immediately.
The three, connecting all three.
We believe we can accelerate competition in the country,
deliver better outcomes for Kiwi businesses
and consumers if we remove the operational barriers
that are hold that are holding us back.
Happy to take your questions.
Oh, very good. Okay. Thank you Adrian.
We appreciate those brief, uh, introductory remarks
and we also appreciate you, um, uh, sticking
to the brief also on your submission, uh, as to responding
to the recommendations that pertain to, um,
your organization.
I'm gonna go to Ryan Hamilton first.
Oh, thanks, chair Kiara.
Adrian, good to see you again and thanks
For Your submission.
Very helpful. I just wanna work through,
I've got a few questions on it.
If we could work through, um,
the first point you mentioned is, um,
obviously you're starting to build on the open banking rails
that have been established, but you mentioned you're gonna
switch rails this quarter.
Uh, it's not so much switching rails,
it's leveraging the existing infrastructure,
which includes the open banking rails
to build real time payments. That's correct, yes.
So when you say switch this capability on, is
that still sort of a work on work in progress currently?
Yeah, so we're weeks away from delivering the initial
proof of concept with the Bank of New Zealand.
So we want to test it and build empirical evidence
and data around the, the,
the consumer appetite and the business need for it.
We believe it exists, but we wanna prove it.
Uh, and if we can prove it with is proof of concept,
then we're seeking to expand all the major
banks and due costs this year.
Okay, cool. In your 0.3,
you talk about being operationally and economically central.
Um, can you expand a little bit on that?
Is that something that, that will happen organically in the
marketplace or does payments New Zealand need to
augment that process?
Um, so the VO we've taken is
through the open banking infrastructure
and with Kiwibank joining later this year,
we feel like we'll get coverage of 95%
of bank New Zealanders, but we want
to be inclusive and accessible to all.
And so there's the second tier banks
that aren't currently participating in that.
And in order for us to have a real time payments network
and generate the sort of the responses
and sort of the outcomes we feel would happen at a national
GDP level, we believe
that everyone should be included, involved.
And so we think there might be another path as opposed
to building massive sort of infrastructure
that potentially if there was a way
to enable the second tier banks to participate,
then every New Zealander
and New Zealand business could, uh, benefit.
And you go on a little bit to explain some of
that bottlenecking that's happening.
So, um, sometimes the banks release the,
like they've done 2.0 in the, in the APIs,
but even then they've stored onboard merchants
or third party approvals.
There's still this big lag in the system
and in fact you go on to mention at the end
of your submission that you'd be prepared
to provide the committee with some anonymized data,
which actually I think could be really useful
to our ongoing accountabilities just in terms of
how we can measure and monitor, um, the uptake.
Yeah. Susan, oh, sorry, sorry.
I did challenge, um, um, uh, Dan from BNZ two on the um,
3.0 which you referenced.
There still some ambiguity in the market from players like
yourself in terms of knowing what's coming
and when. Mm-hmm.
Yeah, so there's a few parts to that, right?
So when it comes to onboarding businesses by banks,
they have very reasonable net requirements from a regulatory
perspective to follow KYC and KYB.
And so each bank kind of does that in their own way.
And in some banks it's a couple of weeks.
Other banks it can take many weeks, sometimes months.
And so that's one of the challenges for people trying
to adopt the open banking standard.
And then when you overlay that with the fact
that some banks not all require, uh, require
that you onboard a business into their systems to, in order
to facilitate payments that adds more time constraints that,
you know, it's weeks and so you've got a merchant ready
to adopt today, they've done all the development work
and then we could potentially lose months just trying
to be able to enable them to actually transact in that way,
which has obviously, um, challenges around sort
of cost business and, uh, merchant confidence.
Coming to your point around version 3.0, um, prior
to the CDR regime, uh, payment, New Zealand was sort
of marshaling the entire industry towards sort
of agreed timelines.
But in the CDR regime, the role
of payment New Zealand has been diminished to a degree.
And so their ability to sort
of marshal run towards an agreed timeline has been
diminished in our view.
And so for us, for version 3.0,
we think it's a pretty critical enabler for New Zealand
because it has two parts to it.
The first part which we really,
really excited about is updating the security standard,
which becomes an enabler to add multi
or business bank accounts.
What does that mean? It means that if you are a large
complex business right now, it's really difficult
to participate in the ecosystem
'cause it hasn't been designed for them.
But with this security enabler going in,
it then enables banks to work on adding multi worth
businesses like the large top end of town.
And so that part I'm hoping for a timeline on,
but it's proving challenging
to get sort of a commitment to that.
Then the second part to that is a bunch
of event notifications, which is really,
really useful if you're trying to track cash flow
and funds are in, funds are out, if funds are being sort of,
um, declined for whatever reason.
And then being able to let people know where funds
and anything is going through the system and where it's at.
So that level of transparency could be enhanced materially
with version 3.0.
Um, final, final question.
Um, and I, and I know you, you're sort
of wearing two hats, Adrian.
You've got your, one, you're building the business
of blank pay, but on the other hand you're also on the
bleeding edge and pioneering for the industry.
So putting that second hat on for a moment, um,
as per our earlier conversation,
if you could provide the committee with some of those, um,
real time sticky points in terms of how we can, um,
I guess put the challenge back to the payments New Zealand
to the banks in in terms of how they can better lay up the,
um, the complexity, the onboarding process,
we can actually do our bit to help hold them to account and,
and sort of spur on that ecosystem as well.
So not wanting to create more homework for you,
but um, that would be really helpful.
You are happy to do so. We think it's a pretty easy fix.
It feels harmonization for business
or merchant onboarding across the banks
and everyone had a committed timeline, then
that would bring certainty
and clarity, which I think would be go a very long way.
Yeah. Thank you Adrian. Just a question from me.
Um, the Minister of Commerce, when he put that, um, uh,
Dateline on for open banking systems to be operational
for the four big banks by one December, 2025,
and with Kiwibank, I understand by one July this year,
is it, um, what did that, what, what did that mean in,
in real terms and
and has that helped, uh, the likes of,
um, FinTech companies?
Yeah, so for those who are already well positioned for
that, 'cause they'd already built all their bilateral
capability, all of their capabilities,
it was a pretty easy switch over.
There's still work to be done.
I want to don't, don't want to diminish the effort
of the big banks, but, but there,
but there's a big difference between sort of, um, sort
of business ready and market ready.
So you might have the technology of, um, ready,
but if it's not available to connect to
where you can't test on it
and use it, then that can be something that can sort
of create lag in the market.
Um, so for many it was a really positive signal
and gave people a really clear signal that this is happening
and a lot of people then starting to join in.
But for others, um, it's meant
that it's been a little bit slower to actually, uh,
connect up and actually use some of these features.
Okay. No, that's good
feedback. Okay, we're gonna go to Dr.
Wolfs. How much time have we got?
Yep. No, you all right. Okay.
So, um, I've got lots of questions, but I'll zoom on.
Zoom in on the hard one first up.
Um, overseas experience tells us that real time banking
and um, and open banking, real time payments
and open banking, when that has been instituted,
there's been a rise in scams
and, um, most of them are attributed to the transaction
that happens right at the source between one organization
and another, namely banks or fintechs.
Um, you've said in here that, um,
that you are looking at realtime transaction scoring, uh,
as a way of trying to sit, catch those red flags.
Can you explain that to us?
Yeah, absolutely. So when you connect up
and make an open banking payment, you have the security
of the sending backs.
You have to go through all their security measures
to be able to consent to the payment,
and then when the payment goes into the receiving bank,
they then apply their own fraud measures.
And the biggest challenge
that we've seen overseas is authorized push pay
where the everyday consumer is
tracked into making a payment.
And so from a bank technology perspective and bank systems,
unless the transaction's way outta whack with their normal,
normal profile, it's really hard to spot.
And so the, the, the real challenge is social engineering.
Um, but what we are trying to do is we are basically working
with a really large, well known, uh, company
to look at doing, uh, transaction monitoring and profiling.
So we are gonna get a whole bunch
of information in real time of the transaction
before it executes, and then we're gonna reserve the right
to maybe say to the sending bank, Hey,
we've seen all this extra data from this tool we have access
to, but we think this payment could stand to be reviewed.
And then we'll also share that data with the receiving bank
because the receiving bank,
they just take the money in blind and they have to try
and figure it out after the fact.
And so we see it as a way to try
and mitigate a little bit of fraud at point of execution,
but also help the receiving bank get more transparency
or sort of the, the, the history to
that transaction and what does that look like?
Is it in keeping with normal
transactional activity by the individual?
Is it coming from bank accounts that are a day old?
Is it, is it, um, transactional activity from, um,
at-risk industries or excluded kind of industries?
So we are trying to bring a lot more transparency in that
as part of our fraud monitoring
because we are very aware
that realtime payments introduces realtime fraud.
Good to hear. Thank you. Adrian.
One more question just around your comments on payments
New Zealand looking to have a, uh, perhaps an independent
outside the banks that are on payments New Zealand board.
Um, has there been any thought to,
'cause this is important
infrastructure for all of New Zealand?
Um, has there been any thought
to more public sector involvement in the governance
of payments New Zealand?
I think there's a lot of ongoing
conversations at the moment.
We continue to advocate for a neutral voice
because as identified, there are some optical challenges
with the banks being the main shareholders in payments
New Zealand, but we feel like the
existing structure works pretty well.
Um, the banks themselves contribute an awful lot to
that in terms of time and money.
A lot of money's contributed, uh, just to sort
of make sure everything works across industry.
So, um, we're still trying to progress those conversations
and we're looking to cover it in various strategy days
that have come up across industry.
Thank you, Adrian. Thank you. Okay.
Thank you, Dr. Wilson. Any anyone else?
No, thank you Adrian.
And thank you also, um, for your commitment to, um, provide,
um, examples and evidence, uh, as you offered, uh,
in your submission to the committee.
Um, Mr. Hamilton seems quite good at giving everyone
homework today, so, um, so if you're able to do that,
you know how to get hold of Liam in the Clark's office
and we welcome any further evidence
or case studies that you've got. Thank you. Yeah,
We'll take that away and get on with it.
Thank you. Cheers. Thank you.
Appreciate it. Okay, now we've got,
well now we're in the flesh with, um, the Reserve bank,
and then we've got mb So, uh, we've got Angus McGregor here,
acting assistant governor of Financial Stability,
and we've got, um, Jess Rowe, director Prudential policy.
Thank you. So Welcome.
And, um, thank you for your
submission and thank you for your patience.
Thank you. Uh, chair.
So Koto, as I say, um, as the chair says, Angus McGregor
and Jess Rowe from the Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
I delighted to be here.
Just to reiterate, apologies from the governor.
She is in the middle of monetary policy deliberations, uh,
as we speak with the committee, um, what can you tell us?
Nothing,
Um, need to see the size of your briefcase.
Um, just to be clear, Jess
and I will be making no comments at all today on monetary
policy or, um, economic conditions.
Uh, generally the governor
and the monetary policy team are
looking forward to seeing you next week.
Mm-hmm. Uh, in respect to the monetary policy statement.
Um, but we're very happy to be here today
to talk about our work in relation to, uh,
the recommendations from your report.
Thank you again for the
excellent report that you've provided.
Um, we are very pleased with the significant progress
that we have made, um, across, uh, a number of the areas,
um, covered in, in your report, uh, the completion
of the capital review, the decisions that we announced, uh,
in December, the establishment
of our financial policy committee, uh,
releasing our competition assessment framework,
widening access to EA
and commissioning, uh, an independent review into, uh,
regulatory barriers to entry, um, among other initiatives.
So, um, again, thank you for the opportunity to be
with you today, and we look forward to,
uh, answering your questions.
Okay. We're going to kick off with, uh, dam.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Uh, um, Jess and is Angus? Angus, yeah.
Good to see you here. Um, thank you for your submission
and, um, for the reviews you've done since the inquiry,
it's quite pleasing to see the outcome of the capital review
and the deposit takers, um, uh, review
and looking at, um, reviewing the definition of banks.
Mm-hmm. Yeah, just keen to get a sense from you on, um,
when the decision for definition
of the banks will be likely to be announced.
And secondly, what, um,
feedback you've had from the bank banking sector on the,
uh, 2025 capital review.
I know you've done some independent analysis,
but, um, if you've got any observations on that.
Thank you, uh, Dan.
So the, um, we're in the,
the consultation phase at the moment in respect of the,
um, use of the term bank.
Uh, that consultation, um, uh, I think closed, uh,
towards the end of last year.
Um, and we'll be looking to, um, make decisions on that, um,
uh, you know, shortly during this year.
Um, give a little bit more detail on the specific timing.
Yeah. We're, um, expecting, um,
to announce decisions in sort
of the first half of this year.
Um, the implementation
of the policy will be under the new legislation, so
that will be sort of done as part of the licensing and,
and won't sort of come into full effect until 2028.
Um, but we were quite clear, you know, sort of on, um,
what we consulted on
and the direction of travel being an expansion of the use
of the term to, to remove any competitive disadvantages, um,
from not being able to use the term.
And in terms of the second part of your question, uh,
we've had, uh, I would emphasize
that we have found the engagement process that we've had
with industry through the short sharp capital review in 2025
to be extremely positive.
Uh, we've had, um, very positive feedback from
industry stakeholders and other stakeholders about the way
in which, um, we have engaged, um, on that process.
In terms of the decisions that we made in December, uh,
as you can imagine, uh,
whenever we make decisions on regulatory settings, lots
of different stakeholders will have lots of different views.
But in broad terms, um, the feedback has been positive, uh,
it has landed well, there is a sense that, uh,
we've calibrated our settings appropriately, taking account
of the fact that we have three quite different groups within
the sector in terms of the large, the midsize,
uh, and the small.
Um, we've really valued developing strong working
relationships, for example,
with the non deposit taking sector over the last couple
of years that's been very, uh, very fruitful, um, for us.
And we've had positive feedback from, uh, from
that sector about the way in which we
are engaging with them.
So, you know, on balance, um, uh, I, I would say that I,
I am, and we are, you know, comfortable with, uh,
where we've landed and the, the, the vibe, if you will,
from, uh, from industry.
Great. And, um, Mr.
Chair, so just turning now
to the Financial policy committee.
So you've, um, appointed new people to the committee.
I understand you, you're gonna meet as a committee, um,
sometime this month, which is exciting.
Um, just looking at your charter,
it looks pretty comprehensive.
I'm just curious to know whether, um,
in developing the charter you had any input from, um,
ministry of Minister of Finance
or, uh, treasury, um, noting that the equivalent
for the monetary policy committee is charter is signed
by the Minister of Finance, and there is input sought.
So I'm keen to understand if you've engaged
with the government of the day around, uh, you know, the
ultimate remit and powers
and, um, transparency for this committee. Good question.
Yeah, we're, we, um, we're really pleased
that the committee has been set up.
I think it, it, it's a,
it's a natural evolution from the Financial Stability
Oversight Committee that we've had.
I think it's a very good development, uh, uh, particularly
with the, the addition of two external members.
So we're looking forward to meeting, um, uh,
in the next couple of weeks, the first meeting
of the committee in terms of the charter, Jess,
do you just want to, um,
cover the consultation process that we've gone through?
So the, this committee's
quite different from the monetary Policy Committee being,
um, a fully independent, um, committee
and, um, you know, with a treasury observer
on the Monetary Policy committee
and the minister's involvement there,
this committee is a subcommittee of the board,
and so, um, there's less of a formalized role there.
Um, the, um, charter itself, um, to my knowledge was,
um, socialized with the Treasury.
Um, we work really closely with the Treasury, um, on, on all
of our, um, financial stability policy.
Um, I would have to check in terms of, um, you know,
ministerial involvement in it,
but it is, I wouldn't emphasize it's, it's sort
of a different beast from the MPC.
It's a nons statutory Yes.
Entity isn't compared to the monetary policy committee,
And it's just as a subcommittee of, of our board,
but we'd be happy to come back and clarify.
Yeah, yeah, that'd be great. And I guess, um,
you fully understand it's not, not nons statutory,
and there's probably reasons for that in terms
of it's been quicker for you
to implement rather than a law change.
But the view from the submitters
and certainly the view from, um, the committee
that when we were thinking about this recommendation was
that it would have as much of an equal status
as the monetary policy committee.
Um, so whether it may not be written in legislation,
it was very much viewed that it would be independent, um,
and accountable, uh, for financial policy.
So, you know, charter looks great. Yeah. Mm-hmm.
Um, it's all there, but just,
I, I would say I would echo exactly what you've said.
That is absolutely the intention.
Um, uh, I wouldn't put too much emphasis on the form.
Um, you know, I think this has been a, a, an effective
and efficient way of establishing the committee in short
order, but exactly the way, um,
you have described the committee
and how it should be, uh, run
and operate is, is what we will be doing.
And I think it will be a, a
really valuable addition to yeah.
Our policy making. So I think
it's a good outcome. Thank you. Yeah,
I was one of Dan's happiest days when he saw
that announced last year,
the financial policy happiest work days.
Anyway, um, financial policy, um, committee established.
Um, please. Um, so, so, so as, um, Mr.
Bidar said the charter has been well established.
What, just give us an insight as to how, uh,
what determines the agenda, uh,
of the financial po po policy committee, uh, the regularity
of meetings and the, um, uh, the public visibility of,
uh, decisions that are made
and direction that is taken, uh, for of that committee.
Yep. Um, so the, the, the agenda is largely driven
by our policy agenda.
Um, as you would expect, you know, what is the pipeline
of policy work that we have, um, uh, coming down, um, uh,
uh, and that's in respect to the deposit taking sector,
the insurance sector, the financial markets,
infrastructure, uh, sector.
So it's looking at, you know, all of those aspects.
So it, it's, um, it's an agenda that is, um, agreed between,
um, essentially, uh, me, um, and,
and the, uh, financial stability group within the Reserve
Bank and the committee chair.
Uh, and our governance team.
Uh, we have quite a, quite a pipeline of agenda items, uh,
that we would be looking to cover over the year.
So plenty of visibility
for committee members as to what's coming.
It's really important that we plan these things well.
Um, so, uh, so I think, you know, we, we've,
we've only had the first discussion about the first agenda
items, so, um, there'll be more of that to follow.
Um, in terms of visibility, we've been giving a,
some thought, uh, particularly in the context of the charter
about, um, about sort of transparency.
Um, we're keen to move to, um, a more transparent approach
to, um, the, the decision making of the, the committee.
Um, but we want to give the committee a new committee time
to bid in and work through, how do we set that up in a,
in the best way, um, so that, uh, we're supporting the work
of the committee, but we're providing the best transparency
we can for New Zealanders.
So, um, we'll look to, um, provide an update on
that in the coming months, and very happy
to continue the conversation with the committee about that.
Okay. Mm-hmm. And the regularity
Of meetings, is that something that's set in?
Oh, apologies. Uh, yes.
Um, the, the,
the meeting regularity is probably something like every six
to eight weeks, but with, uh, some flexibility
to be nimble if there are developing issues.
Um, so again, at the very early stages of that,
and I would expect through the first six months,
we will probably recalibrate the timing once the committee,
um, you know, finds its, um, uh, its rhythm. Yeah. Okay.
Mr. Hamilton, thanks.
Just a broader question, um, just in terms
of the Reserve Bank agenda, where does, uh,
digital currencies
and stable coins sit in terms of, I know I, I tend
to get a bit of a, from treasury, there are sort of a watch
and wait with other jurisdictions,
but I'd just like to know where
that's sitting in your remit.
Yeah, we, we've done quite a bit of work around, uh,
central Bank digital currency in particular.
Um, that is a, a, a challenging and complex area.
The, the point that treasury makes is a very valid one in
terms of many jurisdictions looking at these issues and,
and, uh, and determining, you know, what, when, how to,
um, to, you know, consider the implementation
of, uh, of these matters.
We, we are really pivoting at the moment Yeah.
Um, to our focus on the payments
modernization side of things.
Um, and so, you know, a lot of that good work
that's been done in the context of, um, digital currency is,
you know, relevant to payments modernization.
The Reserve Bank has been asked to lead that, um, piece
of work, as you'll be aware, uh, in respect
of the payments modernization work that was alluded
to on the, um, uh, by the previous, um, submitter.
So, um, so I would, I would really emphasize that
that is our primary focus at the moment, and,
and this sort of context is really, um, looking at
that payments modernization side of things.
And, and look, you know, things like digital currency,
stable coins, you know,
we always have a view on the horizon about the changing
nature of the sector.
Um, we've done, uh, a really interesting piece
of work on the future of banking, thinking about what the,
the, the sector might look like over, um, you know,
5, 10, 15 years,
and what sort of changes do we, as regulator need to make
to ensure that we are keeping up with
that changing environment.
Um, we'll be looking to publish something on that, um, uh,
in the next few months, and we'll be very happy to discuss
that further with the committee as well.
So we're always thinking about,
it's not just the regulatory settings for today, it's also
how do we make sure we are, we are fit for purpose
as a regulator and playing our part in the system, um,
over the medium and long term.
Mm-hmm. Your capital review that announcement, uh,
in December, how do you see it, um, how do,
how do you gauge the response that you may
or may not have got from some of our lead bankers?
Uh, again, I, I'm, I'm pleased with the response that,
that, that we've had to that, um, it's the, the challenge
with something like this chair is that if everyone's,
if everyone's too happy, we've probably got it wrong.
Um, uh, but, uh, on balance,
We're very familiar with that concept.
Um, but on balance, I have genuinely been very pleased
with the reaction that we've had across those three
different groups, um, you know,
from the largest through to the smallest.
And I think the thing
that I'm most pleased about is the feedback we've had about
the manner in which we engaged with industry,
with stakeholders, um, on that process,
which was very constructive, very collaborative.
We approached it with a curious mindset and an open mindset,
and that is very much what we've heard back from industry,
which I think is very positive.
Y you, um, just finally, you, you,
you commissioned an independent survey, as you've mentioned,
of potential Australian entrance, uh,
which identified potential policy areas
that could boost entry.
Uh, when do you, um, expect to, uh, you know,
release the findings of that?
Oh, so that has been released, changed. It
Has been. Okay. So, yeah.
So we actually released that as part
of the materials on the capital.
Oh, that came out on the 16th
December. Yeah. And I,
I admit there's a large bunch of material
that came out on that date.
We actually have another tranche
of material coming out later this month.
We are being very transparent.
Um, in our release, we're releasing our
summary of submissions.
We want to be very clear with stakeholders about the
decisions we've made and why we've made, made them.
And the, uh, that particular report was part
of the materials that we released in the middle of December.
Very happy to have further discussions about that report.
It was, it was a helpful, um, insight into, um,
certainly perceptions from, uh,
market participants in Australia
who aren't currently active in New Zealand. And
Was it, was it encouraging?
Uh, well, I mean, the main theme that really came out
of it, um, a number of themes,
but the main theme really came out about, about the kind
of the main barriers, um, are the size
and scale of the New Zealand market.
Mm-hmm. Um, which shouldn't come as a surprise to any of us.
Mm-hmm. Um, so that, that is, that is, that is sort
of somewhat what we expected,
and it was interesting to, to get that confirmed. Mm-hmm.
And, and nor should we ever become the seventh state
of Australia to avoid that.
Indeed, We are quite happy
with our side and scale many.
Okay. Thank you so much. Pleasure. Thank you. Okay.
That le leads us to, um, uh, the Ministry
of Business Innovation and Employment.
So thank you to the Reserve Bank.
Very good.
Okay. If you're able to introduce yourself,
and we look forward to your, um, uh,
not submission presentation.
Thank you. And thank you for submitting your written one.
Uh, that's no problem. I'm Efron Wilson
binding from the Ministry
of Business Innovation and Employment.
I'm a senior advisor in the financial markets team.
Now, in terms of, um, I, I could
either rattle through what we are, we are, we are doing
with respect to, um, the response to the FEC inquiry,
or I'm having just to answer questions from, from now.
Okay. Um, right.
Would you, why don't you just give us some introductory
comments as to you've res, you've responded to those res
that, um, uh, that, that pertain directly to mb Mm.
What, from your perspective, what did you,
what did you find, um, you know, what,
what is the most compelling
one? Probably just get the ball rolling.
Sure. I think the most compelling one is,
uh, open banking.
That's probably the, uh, the biggest, um, fish in terms of
what Envy's doing in terms of the response.
Um, as you will all know, the, um,
the government regulations under the consumer
and Product Data Act came into O on one December, 2025.
Um, so it's officially live, um, all four designated banks,
um, A-N-Z-A-S-B-B-N-Z
and Westpac, um, are, you know, largely compliant with the
regulatory requirements, um, for open banking.
Um, and MB is continuing to work with these banks, uh,
to address minor and technical compliance issues.
Um, also, Kiwi Bank is on track to deliver open banking, um,
for payments by one June, 2026.
That's one June. Okay.
Um, and one December, 2026, uh,
for account information, um, in accordance
with Reg regulations.
Um, and also MB has accredited four fintechs
with five other applications in progress.
So that's the, that's the key, I think, um, item for mb.
Um, but there are a bunch of other related, um,
work streams occurring at MV that you may
or may not be interested in.
Um, I mean, they're, they're not directly related
to competition, um,
but noting some of the questions in the, the letter sent to,
um, Susan Stu, um,
that they may be relevant if you want to. Okay.
We'll See how we go. We're gonna go to Nancy
Lou, thank you so much.
Um, I, I have to say, uh,
the submission from MB is probably the
most succinct in mm-hmm.
In all of the submissions, which in other words,
it also means it hasn't given us a lot
of, a whole lot of information.
So thank you for coming forward today.
To answer your comment just now that you have, uh,
MB has accredited four fintechs,
and at the moment assessing another five, you said
that's very high level.
What, what, what, what were the four?
Why have you accredited, what are the next five that are
through the applications?
What do you see as a trend, the sa, the scale, the size
of these fintechs? We'd love to know more.
Good. Thanks for the question.
Um, I regret to say that I'm Amir for MB
with regard to open banking.
So I'm, I'm, um, I expect to, to have to, uh, come back
to the committee to provide that further information.
Okay. But we absolutely do
That. Yeah. That, that
would be great.
Because you also alluded to
that this is probably the biggest and,
and most interesting thing, um, from an MB perspective
for us to understand.
So I would love more information on that.
Also, MBS assessment with
so far the four fintechs credited
and assessing more what is MBS pers, like,
what is MBS own review in terms of the speed
of the fintechs coming on board with the application,
the speed of the actual review done by mb, um, the quality
of the applications.
Is there anything, for example, that MB can do in terms of
refining or reviewing the process so it's more accessible,
applicable, or welcoming for fintechs
to apply some kind of review?
I know it's relatively new, uh, for MB
and for everyone else, um, but some review
and understanding on that will be great.
Um, on
that, um,
because there are not a whole lot of information
that I can dive into.
Um, I also wanted to ask you, um,
for mb are there any hard dashboard
for 2026 being it's the first year since, um,
the first year anniversary of their open banking
and opening up and for open, uh,
and for, I want to understand what is the target
for MB to achieve in year one in 2026 to make sure
that we are allowing for more progress, uh, in
beyond 2026?
So including any specific KPIs, any targets that MB will
continue to track in 2026 and beyond.
Yeah. And if I can just reinforce that, um, Nancy,
you know, one of our key wrecks was about, um, uh,
recommending to the Reserve bank,
and I know that you're not the Reserve bank,
but, um, consider lowering barriers for overseas banks
and fintechs to enter the New Zealand market.
Um, and we've got here MB has initiated early stages policy
work to consider barriers relating
to specific types of FinTech.
And I suppose, uh, just reinforcing what Nancy's, um,
pointing at, how much urgency is there,
how much resources is there, um, an mb uh, to, to really,
um, tackle that recommendation as far as lowering,
uh, barriers of entry.
So in relation to all of the, the matters that you raise.
Mm-hmm. Um, I've jotted those down
and we can absolutely finish
that information to the committee.
In relation to the second point, I think what, uh,
perhaps belies that, um,
quite general statement about the work
that MD's doing is mostly
because as noted, we are yet to get and Aster decisions.
Um, so we are yet to complete the analysis.
That's absolutely something that we are committed to doing
and putting resource into,
but, um, we are waiting for to advise the minister on that.
Okay. Dr. Wilson?
Yeah, just a supplementary, I'll be playing the same harp,
sorry, uh, on open banking
because it's your responsibility to advise and regulate.
So, um, really interested in the stickiness here
because these fintechs are banking with banks
and the banks are providing them
with open banking facilities.
In my experience, most often the fintechs are actually ahead
of the banks in terms of
how they can implement these things.
We moved from one and already this morning, so
really interested in what that is looking like and whether
or not it is facilitated through that system, um,
and whether or not there's barriers.
Um, I would've to say that again,
that's something I would, um, come back to the
Committee. Yeah, there was a supplementary,
so we're on the same theme here. That's
Okay. Well, if there's
any further, um, information
that you're able to provide off the back of some
of these questions
and, uh, queries that have been put to you, you know,
we welcome you to, um, feed anything
through via Liam at the Clark's office.
So thank you for your time.
We appreciate you coming in and, uh,
and I'm sure we'll get you back in another six months
too, right, right.
About a month before the election. That's
Right. Thanks very
much. Thank you. Hey, thank you. Okay.
Hey, thanks so much, members.
We are, we are back on time, so there you go.
So I thank you for your cooperation and ensuring that
and, um, uh, and for everyone's, um, patience.
We are now we are back to the budget
policy statement hearings.
Um, and we've got St.
Peter's on Willis Social Justice group,
and we've got Gail here, um, who's, uh, familiar
with these surrounds and with making submissions.
So thank you for your patience and we look forward to it.
Thank you, Cameron. I appreciate your introduction.
And the social justice group expresses our thanks
for this opportunity to speak to the Finance
and Expenditure Committee.
Uh, the key goal of the 2026 budget suite is
to get the government's books back in order
and restore discipline to public spending.
The purpose of our submission is to highlight the imposition
of further hardship
and stalling of productivity that this, that is inevitable
in the propositions of the budget policy statement.
This is unjust and given the outcomes to workers
and businesses in the last two years
and lack of improvement in productivity,
a new course based on expansion of government spending
and investment should be considered.
The social justice group does not see
how the first two goals of the budget policy can build a
strong and productive economy that lifts real incomes
and increases opportunity for New Zealanders,
or deliver a more effective
and responsive public services
when the proposed fiscal tightening is the same
as that used in the past.
Uh, budgets from December, 2023 onwards, woods
restoration of law
and order has been by building more prisons.
Public service has been diminished significantly
following the layoffs of so many public servants.
Health outcomes are not improving
with the focus being on reducing health expenditure
and outsourcing health services
and infrastructure to private bodies.
The social justice group de deploys the government
expenditure on our charter schools and the elimination of re
and our New Zealand history from the curriculum
to impose a more European ACA academic qualification route,
rather than a broader suite of outcomes, including training
for occupations and skills essential to our communities.
The third goal is the aim
of getting the government's books back in order
and restoring discipline to public spending.
The tight control over discretionary spending
to date has not delivered the outcomes promised.
Instead, tax revenue is falling
and benefit expenses are rising
through no fault of beneficiaries.
The social justice group is concerned
that this spending restraint will continue a downward spiral
of wellbeing, increasing poverty,
and reducing the prospects for the majority
of New Zealanders, which has been highlighted in the
Salvation Army report released today.
The other consequence is a reduction in revenue
with the total tax take expected
to be lower over the forecast period.
Investment and essential services such as health, housing,
public transport, freight, transport,
and water infrastructure to name a few, along
with the provision of basic income for all.
New Zealanders would instead open up our
economy and increase revenue.
Economic forecasts are lower,
and it is objectionable
that the government is claiming the current fiscal
situation is not its responsibility.
The government does have discretion
to increase New Zealand's productivity and economic outlook.
Right now, our current unemployment rate is continuing
to increase, reaching 5.4% in the last quarter.
Security of work has declined
and there is under utilization.
The strangulation of our economy has been due
to conservative constriction, bringing uncertainty
to business and lack of ambition
to enable productive activities.
This has reduced the wellbeing of too many New Zealanders.
The N-Z-C-T-U mood
of the workforce survey published in January
expresses the despair of the workforce.
Education and social services are seen
as being deliberately run down.
Frontline workers in health education
and social services feel distressed and undermined.
Research and new thinking indicate austerity measures such
as those implemented in the late in the 1980s
and nineties made no improvements in productivity overall.
A different approach is outlined in the IMF policy note
2024, highlighting that social spending can tackle
existing poverty and income inequality
and mitigate the effects of economic shocks.
Also, the recent International Trade Union conference paper
on austerity versus protection highlights the mounting
economic social and environmental challenges workers face.
And that austerity measures exacerbate inequalities,
undermined living standards, and hinder progress.
The IMF October Global Financials stability report in
2025 emphasizes the need for measures
that raise the efficiency of public spending,
supporting sustainable
and inclusive private growth,
while avoiding blanket spending cuts.
To conclude the continued austerity measures proposed
by the budget policy statement 2026
are not conducive to economic recovery or ameliorating debt,
and will instead to compound poverty
and discrimination St.
Peter's on what a social justice group recommends
that the budget policy statement is rewritten
to mitigate impact on human rights
as prescribed in the United Nations Declaration
of Human Rights, and maintain the duty of government
for ongoing provision of government services,
including infrastructure, ensuring adoption
of policies the most effective at reducing poverty
and inequality, and advancing
participation in our society. Thank you.
Okay. Thanks, Gail. Questions, members comments?
Dr. Wilson, are you gonna get a vote of thanks at least?
Yeah, absolutely. As per usual, uh, very comprehensive.
Okay. Thank you. Um, one question.
If, if you had the reins,
how would you improve productivity?
Beg Your pardon. How would you improve productivity?
Well, productivity is by, um, uh,
improved confidence by business.
And, um, the, um, if you look at the,
uh, statements made by business, part of the problem is
that they haven't, that they've got stop start, um,
whether I bring that, um, the, um, ferry example up
or other that can't in invest and be sure to get started.
So it would be great.
Certainty is one thing. Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Okay. We're gonna go to doc, Dr.
Just a a up on that.
And thanks for the question, Dr. Olson.
And you rightly brought up the cts, um, mood
of the workforce and some of the comments we saw coming in
through that, that survey.
Um, the last 12 months of my work life have been the worst
of my career so far.
Um, do you think that the,
the way in which workers are feeling has a direct
implication on productivity levels?
Yes. The, uh,
the way workers are feeling is a demonstration of the impact
of the, um, budgets, um, of late.
And, um, there is an, a responsibility to lift the mood
and, um, expectation of workers by utilizing them,
which means, um, employing them
and retaining those with the experience
and not having, um, a misallocation of workers
that have moved out of high responsibility positions
and capability down to lesser positions and roles.
Thank you very much. Okay. Thank you, Gail, for coming in.
Thank you again. All the best for the rest of the day. Okay.
Now we're going to Dr. Rebecca Graham, who's online
for parents of, uh, vision Impaired New Zealand.
Doctor, welcome.
Nice to see you. Thank you for having me. Yes.
Joined us, right? We're in
your hands. We've got 10 minutes.
Lovely. Um, you will have read my submission.
Um, I did want to start, um, by acknowledging some
of the changes that are happening, um, particularly aware
of the announcement yesterday
by Disability Support Services, uh,
and the changes that are happening there.
Uh, and in particular, the additional funding
that's been granted over, uh, four years, uh,
to address some of the challenges in terms
of disability support and carer work.
Um, so that is a positive
and we are looking forward to seeing how
that rolls out this year.
Uh, the other thing too, uh, that I acknowledged was that,
uh, we also have a new disability strategy.
So, uh, there's a new disability strategy 26 to 2030,
which has been approved.
Uh, and some of the actions in there for education,
I think are included in this budget in terms
of increased funding for learning support.
Um, there's also the settlement, um, with I actually
and the Ministry of Education
and the associated framework for action,
and the hope that this will then lead to better provision
of inclusive education for all children.
Uh, however, when looking at the currently available stats,
uh, they're pretty grim.
And at PBI, we have families who have very young children,
uh, right through to families whose children
are in their thirties and forties.
So, uh, we get a bit of a snapshot in terms
of the life course and the life outcomes.
Uh, and one of the concerns in terms
of looking at the statistics is that
there doesn't seem to be a comprehensive approach in terms
of improving outcomes across the life course.
Uh, and we see that, um,
at the moment we have blind children
who are being told they cannot attend their local ECE, um,
unless the parent funds one-to-one support.
And so already you have this discrimination happening,
but also you're not having access
to the same education opportunities.
Uh, and then, um, throughout education, uh,
challenges there in terms of accessing materials, uh,
accessing the preferred alternate formats, um, teachers
who don't necessarily understand what's required, uh,
for accessibility, uh,
and, uh, in increased costs across that time,
around transportation, around access, around, uh,
alternate formats.
And then we see these stats at the end with this increase in
disabled persons who are not in education, employment,
or training, uh,
and how that impacts in terms of, you know,
productivity and wealth.
Uh, there was a recent article, uh, published,
which I did reference, uh,
and this was around estimating the additional income needed
to address the higher deprivation levels
of children in households with disabled people.
Uh, and this is a fairly, uh, solid piece
of statistical analysis.
Uh, one of the authors, uh, Dr.
Jonathan Godfrey is the chair for the Association
of Blind Citizens New Zealand, a member
of the Blind Low Vision community.
Uh, and, uh, uh, it's a bit
of a depressing read, uh,
but in particular, uh, really wanted to note that, uh,
they used the pooled HES data
and they estimated that, um, on an equalized income basis
that households with children
and a disabled person need
between $8,424,000 more income
per year just to match the standard of living of households
with children and no disabled person.
Um, so a significant shortfall there.
Uh, and that plays out in terms
of these longer term outcomes for employment.
Um, the level of pay that, uh, people get, uh,
and, uh, the need really to
create budgets and approaches
and policies that, uh, address this in order
to have similar life outcomes would be ideal.
Uh, and I am going to stop there 'cause that's five minutes.
Um, in case there are questions that
No, there are.
Thank you, Rebecca. We're gonna go to Doc, we're
Gonna go to Dr. Deborah Russell.
Hey. Hey. Um, uh, Dr. Graham, lovely to see you here today.
Um, and I know your work well.
Um, uh, uh, if there was
just one thing that we could do to increase, um,
I guess support for families, um,
with disabled children in particular, uh, one simple measure
that would, um, would, what what would you do?
Sure. Um, if we had money,
and you wouldn't need much money to do this.
One thing that you could do quite easily within the existing
structures without changing too much is you could make the
supported living payment, uh, uh, like a pension.
And so doing so would remove the abatements,
remove the means testing,
and would mean that carers, uh, who are caring for a person
who are on the SLP
and disabled people
who receive the SLP are no longer penalized
for having things like, um,
a small business that they want to run.
Or having a partner who earns just over, uh,
the threshold, which is quite low.
It's something like $65,000, it's not a lot of money.
Um, so that would make a significant difference straight
away to a number, uh, 95,000 plus families.
The other thing you could do, which wouldn't cost any money,
but would start to really shift things in the education
space is you could require boards of trustees of schools
to give effect to the U-N-C-R-P,
the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons
with disabilities in respect to education.
So you could require, uh, the,
might put a requirement in there in terms
of not just engaging with the families
who attend the school, but also
with their local disability community
and providing some reporting, uh, around that.
Um, so those are two fairly easy things
that wouldn't require a lot, that would really start
to shift things in a significant way.
If we have money, we could absolutely double
and triple the disability allowance
and the child disability allowance,
and that would straight away instantly shift things.
But, um, don't always have money.
Um, thank you. Those are really
obvious and clear things to do.
Um, uh, the, just a couple of follow up questions, um,
on the supported living payment,
have you done crunched any numbers on that, Beck or, um,
Oh, look, no, that's not my forte.
Yeah. What I've done is talk to disabled people
and they've said, why don't we do this like a pension?
It would just make it so much easier. Sure.
Uh, particularly older disabled who,
who are now on the pension, then they're like, oh,
this is just so much better.
Yep. Okay. And, um, your comment with respect to, um, uh,
something that we could require boards of trustees
of schools to do, um, do you think that would impose, I
we find it hard to recruit trustees in any case,
and that does seem like quite a significant,
um, requirement for them.
I agree it would be a great thing to do,
but that, you know, that sort of, uh, we require a lot
of those trustees anyway.
Is, uh, can you just speak to that a little?
Sure, sure.
Um, I, I think really what you've highlighted is
that there is already such ignorance for boards
of trustees in terms of their obligations.
So there are obligations for boards of trustees in terms
of disability and inclusion.
Most boards of trustees are not aware, uh, or not okay,
or not up with those obligations.
So there is that real gap between, uh, what's expected at,
at sort of a, a, a macro level
and then what's happening on the ground.
Um, but also when I think about the way in which boards gave
effective and have come out really strongly
and wanting to continue to give effective Tet,
it is not too much of a leap to go from that
to supporting disabled persons.
And it's not too much of a leap to go from that to engaging
with disability communities.
Uh, and that didn't happen overnight.
That sort of happened over a process of years.
So I think it's entirely possible
and it's not asking too much to start
to develop relationships with intent around disability.
Okay. That's a really nice analogy. Thank you, doc.
Uh, just one from me, doc Graham to finish up.
You note here in your submission quote, we are heartened
by the changes to the disability support services, um,
which you also note includes, um,
an additional $1 billion over four years,
and the implementation early this year
of the new flexible funding arrangements that, uh,
the honorable Louise Upton announced last year.
What, what difference does flexible funding, uh, mean
for the disability community?
Sure. Um, so you would've seen, I'm sure, uh, the many,
many protests and, uh, someone that happened last year when,
uh, flexible funding was stripped away.
Uh, and a lot of the comments and opinion pieces
and news pieces and protests outside of offices occurring,
uh, and that really highlighted that for families
who have a disabled family member
who receive disability supports, the flexible funding means
that they can use the funding in a way
that makes a difference for them.
And that is really important
because disability is, uh, is super individualized
and what works for one household might not work for another.
Uh, and even in our community, what works
for one blind child doesn't work for another.
Uh, because, uh, a, the nature of the disability, the nature
of the family, the nature of the need, uh, is so variable.
And so having flexibility means that families are able
to identify the need
and then meet that disability related need.
Um, I'm thinking for our families, uh,
who use alternate formats, it means they can use
that funding to purchase audio books if
that's what works for the child.
Or they can use that funding
to purchase tactile equipment if
that's what works for the child.
Or they can use that mon money to pay for transportation,
uh, and to pay for someone to come
and take their child to an activity.
Um, so there's three different examples there straight
Away. Yeah. They, they're really
good real life examples.
So, um, thank you and thank you for your, all,
your advocacy, uh, on, on ensuring just that.
So, um, thank you, uh, Dr. Graham for your, um,
comprehensive submission
and your appearance, uh, this morning or this afternoon.
Thank you for having me. Enjoy the rest of the day.
Okay. Thank you members.
Uh, we we're now switching back, uh, to, um, the banking,
uh, competition inquiry.
Uh, and we have with us here, Catherine McGrath,
CEO of Westpac.
So thank you Catherine for, uh, all the work you do.
And thank you for finding the time, uh, to appear
before us, um, this afternoon.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd just like to acknowledge you
and the committee members' presence,
and we've noted the committee's topics of interests
and clearly ready to answer your questions.
But before we start, I'd just like to reiterate
that we're very supportive of the work of this committee,
particularly the Drive for Strong competition,
focus on growth and productivity
for our customers and the economy.
Your work has resulted in a significant work program within
the bank building on the work from the market study.
And my reflection on that, in many cases, the regulators
and the private sector will need to work together closely
to make sure we implement those, these changes in a way
that make sure that the delivered outcomes
for New Zealanders are those that the committee intends.
And we look forward to being a very active
contributor to that process.
Thank you. Okay. Well that was very succinct. That's good.
Um, now you've got, everyone's got the submission.
Uh, you've, uh, congratulations to your comms team for, um,
uh, going to the order of, uh, what we asked for,
which was sync succinct responses, uh,
to the recommendations that pertain to you, uh, as a bank.
Uh, so questions we'll go to Dr. Wilson.
Um, thank you very much for your graph on page
or your pictorial on page five, uh, which sits out really,
uh, efficiently, the fragmented regulatory framework, um,
which you say is leading to inefficient
and disjointed initiatives from doctrine
regulators and authorities.
A couple of you highlighted there is, uh, why DIA now
and the regulator in charge of a ML anti-money laundering
and why is MB regulator on open banking where we have RB
and ZFMA Commerce Commission, the whole lot
of interrelationships there.
Can you give us some insight from your perspective of how
that can be tidied up and why?
Um, I guess the most starting point is, uh, less for me
to talk about this solution
because that's in the hands, um, of all of you.
But I can certainly talk about some of the complexities,
um, that arise.
And so I think it's when we start
to have multiple conversations with the same regulator, um,
on very similar topics
that I think it's not the most productive
or efficient use of the regulators' time
and particularly where it's on, uh, topics that it's harder
to get the right skill of resource.
And I think we are better to have, uh, resources, uh,
once asking the questions once
and great resources rather than spreading too thin.
So one example of that would be resilience, uh,
in the banks, uh, critical, uh, topic
and really important that there's a really good skill level
and understanding particularly cyber
and day-to-day resilience.
Um, we have those conversations with both the RBNZ
and the FMA, both of them coming from slightly, um,
different perspectives.
One's about overall, um, the resilience of the system,
the FMAs interested in it, particularly for the impact,
um, on consumers.
But at the heart of it, it's the same questions,
it's the same responses.
And if I was, um, sitting in a shoe where it was my job
to upon on it, I would look at areas like that to say, is
that, is that the right model
or should we have greater clarity?
Uh, second question looks like, uh,
and I congratulate you that, uh, you've gotten ahead
of the game in terms of switching and open banking, um, uh,
and uh, your little example
where you offered home loan customers from other banks,
the opportunity to refix their loans
with West without having to provide the same level
of information the customer applying
for an entirely new loan.
Can you kind of explain how that worked and,
and what got you to that position done?
Um, so we are the fourth, uh,
in order of the New Zealand banks.
And I'm not satisfied with being number four.
I'd like us to be bigger 'cause I think we do
great work in the community.
So encouraging the teams
to help us grow is an important part of what we do.
Um, part of the thinking behind that is that we know
that many others do a lot of diligence.
Making it easier for people who have already met
that benchmark once
before to be able to switch is important.
What's great with open banking is the ease of moving
that information around to be able to demonstrate, um,
your financial, uh, ability to meet obligations
and that it's something that's affordable for you
will make that a lot easier.
And we look forward to seeing plenty more of that,
whether it's through partnering with fintechs
or through doing, uh, the work ourselves.
Final question from me switching a little bit here.
Um, you said that overseas experience in the us, UK
and Brazil has shown a strong relationship
between the introduction of past payment systems
and an increase in fraud
and scams, specifically authorized push payment,
which we heard about earlier today.
Um, and that the UK has shown that that's the majority
of the, of the issue.
But, uh, we had one other subscriber, uh,
one other submitter say to us that actually they're looking
to, um, as a receiving bank
and a FinTech ensure that there are, um, if you like,
red flags and notes that they can take advantage of
and knowing their customer
and then relaying back to the, uh,
the providing bank or the issuing bank.
Have you got any comments
around when you are the receiving bank
and what you're doing to, uh, say mitigate that problem?
So I think the benefit of doing things a second time in
your career as you learn what you wouldn't do again
because of the consequences of it.
So I was in the uk, uh,
and leading for Barclays on, uh, both the introduction
of the Ford and Scams network there.
And, uh, faster payments was already in place.
And what you saw, uh, is that the UK is now the
most, uh,
effective place if you're a scammer where you want to go.
And we certainly don't want that happening
here now Tierra as well.
So one of the things that's been good is the industry here,
uh, put in place, um, confirmation of pe We did that
as a central capability.
And what we are starting to do now is share the data, um, on
where we think we've got suspected mules, um,
who are the recipient banks,
and so that you can share
that information more easily between the banks.
I think there's plenty more that we can
continue to do on that too.
There are technology solutions that can help, which some
of the banks are looking at, but we also need
to think about the balance between, um,
privacy and protecting others.
So an example of a scams case where, uh,
the details of the bank account that was a mule was shared,
but for privacy reasons we weren't at that time able
to share the name of the person.
And it turned out that person had
accounts at many different banks.
And so that becomes a problem.
So I think there's good work happening.
Information sharing between the banks is far better
and that's making a difference.
Uh, but I still think there's room to improve it.
Yeah. And, and perhaps, um, in terms of privacy, um,
you know, there is, there's an opportunity within the law
currently to, if you suspect anti-money laundering
or anything else, fraud or anything like that,
you can actually share the information.
So I would put it that perhaps that hasn't been utilized
as much as it could have been.
Yes, I think there is.
Uh, so I think it is when it's clear, when it's clear,
I think suspected is a, uh, is a harder ground,
but is as important to ground, uh, to step into.
And the work that we're doing with the antis scams, uh,
center capability in New Zealand, I think we'll continue to,
uh, deliver good outcomes for customers
and good outcomes for the, uh, ecosystem as a whole.
Thank you for those excited answers.
Thank, thank you Dr. Wilson. We're gonna go to Nancy Lou,
Thank you chair and welcome you, see you again.
Um, I wanted to ask a bit more about, uh, your responses
to recommendation four, which is around review, um, of fees
and profits on everyday accounts, um,
for everyday New Zealanders.
So thanks for including the numbers in terms of, you know,
and for example, you say
in the last six months we've emailed 128,000 times
and a further 74,000 follow up emails making a total
of 203,000.
Um, first of all, I want to know if that is
an increase in the amount of emails
and extra effort that Westpac have done compared
to before the banking review.
And then secondly, what is the success rate?
And after that would be if the success rate is not high
enough, is this the best way to communicate our consumers
or your, your, your customers actually opening up the email?
What is the best way to approach
and what would be the improvement going forward?
Uh, so firstly, uh, it's not a new thing we were doing at,
uh, before the market study,
and I think that's the right thing, uh, to do.
And I think it's individual nudges to me, based on whether
or not I'm getting behavior at the time it's most relevant,
I think is the most effective way of helping consumers
to get best value out of their banking, uh, relationships
or any product that they've got.
Um, about 42% we see do a change as a result of it.
Okay. Um, that's quite high, um,
in my experience and, and good.
Um, and the reality is if you, if you as an individual
keep not using that product in a way
that we think you're getting value, you will keep getting,
um, the same nudges and you may just ignore them.
Because actually for you, you are perfectly fine
and you don't want to do anything with it.
So I think our job is right information at the
most relevant point in time.
Uh, the one that I tend to see, I'm in a bonus saver.
If you take the money out within the month, um,
you don't get the bonus rate before you move the money.
It gives me a mud nudge that says, do you realize
that in doing this, this is the consequence.
And again, very timely.
Generally I move the money anyway
'cause there's a reason for needing
to get the cash, uh, out.
So, but that's up to consumers to choose what they do.
But the right information at the right time,
I think is the heart of getting value.
Do you see any value in increasing that 42%?
Like what, what are the other 58% people doing?
Uh, so the, the other 58% are either choosing to, um,
either the, they're saying I'm fine with it.
So if you, we send that to everybody over $3,000,
you may sit there with three and a half thousand dollars
and choose not to do, uh, anything with it.
Um, so I don't, for me, that's up to consumers about
how they want to respond
to the right information at the right time.
So I don't think there's a right answer
'cause there's a hundred different reasons why someone will
or will not have responded to that nudge.
And so you're comfortable with, with that.
Has that, has that changed over time?
Um, I don't know, but we can
come back to you if that would be helpful.
Okay. Thank you
Catherine. We've got
a, um, a FinTech entrepreneur who's gonna be
President Beta, who's concluded in his, uh, submission, um,
that he respectfully requests this committee
to hold the banks financial services industry to account,
uh, for how they engage and support local fintechs.
He notes that without genuine engagement
and support from the incumbent banks
and financial services industry,
that these local FinTech companies risk failing
before they can scale.
What's your response to that?
Uh, very supportive of working with fintechs
and I see it as a key part of the New Zealand ecosystem.
So from an open banking perspective, uh, we have nine
that are up and running at the moment.
We've had over 165,000 transactions going through.
One of the ones we work in particular with is Poly.
Um, the methodology
that they have historically used called screen scraping.
I'm not at all supportive of, um, for a whole raft
of customer protection reasons,
but I love that they're choosing to work, uh, with us,
that we can help them migrate onto the open banking rails,
which I think is a far better way, but it's brilliant
'cause they're a well known brand in the New Zealand market.
Uh, we've got four that are currently, uh, accredited,
but going through the testing process.
Um, and we do partner with them,
so aka who's a New Zealand FinTech.
Um, the transaction enrichment that we have done, uh,
for our customers,
we've done working in partnership with a kahu.
Okay. How, how do you think Westpac's, that relationship
with fintechs sounds like it's well established,
um, and, and growing.
How does that, how do you think you compare to, um,
uh, your competitors?
Um, so I think on some of it, we have been a bit slower.
We were a bit slower on the early days of open banking,
but we were quick, uh, towards the end, which is why we got,
uh, in ahead of market
and ahead of the requirement dates
for the 1st of December implementation.
Um, the anecdotal feedback that I hear is
that we are very good to deal with.
We're actually an agency bank, so that means
that we provide services to competitors,
uh, who are smaller than us.
So I think it's in our DNA that we know how to work well
with those that we compete with in the right way
and not reaching any competition, uh, guidance.
So I anticipate that we will see plenty more of it
and the work that MBS now starting to do
to a credit should make it, uh, far easier for the fintechs
to plug into the banks as well. Well,
That's good to hear. And and you're
the government bank too, so that's great.
Yes. Okay. We're gonna go to Ryan Hamilton. Thanks, chair.
Um, thanks for your submission.
I actually enjoyed your diagram on page five, um,
that was earlier, but, um, bit of clarity in the, uh,
overlapping entities and things.
So that was really helpful. Um, just going
to payments New Zealand, it's,
it's obviously been an issue today as well,
just providing clarity around the work you do
and also as a shareholder.
Obviously there's an inherent conflict there,
but you make a good point about it,
it being broader in terms of human data rights and,
and the need for it to grow.
Have you got any thoughts around how that might, um, move
or shape the next, I don't know, 18, 24 months?
So I think with payments in particular,
it's a pretty interesting and complex ecosystem.
And I think what was great about what they did
with the API center is that half of half of
that was fintechs, half of that was banks.
And you need all of those parties to work together
to do some of the new things.
'cause you're both leveraging existing rails,
um, and new rails.
And so I expect that the role of payments NZ
and how we, uh, ensure that we think that's working well
for the ecosystem will continue to evolve.
But I think having all of those voices
around the table is important.
One of the things that we would love to see is a very clear
and longer term roadmap.
The reality with a lot of our legacy existing systems is
that they are heavy and complicated.
We like adding new things and not retiring old things.
Um, and in order to make sure we compete well on the world
stage, we need the new,
but we need to be thoughtful about retiring the old.
And so I think a clear, uh, roadmap
and to the point that was raised earlier, there aren't
that many people who are awesome technical
payments experts in New Zealand.
And so getting them working collectively on the right
problems at the right time, uh, is one of the reasons
that I think that roadmap would be really important. Yeah.
One of the issues that come up earlier from, um, one
of the, of the fintechs was around API 3.0 or the, you know,
and, and, uh, one of your colleagues CEOs said that
they thought that was already clear
and in the marketplace, whereas the FinTech goes,
has it been released so ambiguous?
And so I think you're pointing around the pipeline
of clarity and milestones would be, um,
would be advantageous just to help.
And, and the other point he made was,
even though we've got these milestones and it,
and we tick the box, the integration,
the actual integration is still clunky
and bottlenecks and that sort of thing.
So I think yeah, I guess it's a, a work on. Yep.
And that will help to work with industry. And
So I think we, uh,
whilst we quite rightly would say we are late,
the pace at which we are going is faster than others
who have had open banking in place for a long time.
And I think recognizing
how we continue to evolve it is important.
I had one of the, um,
competition market authority commissioners who I met
when I was doing it the last time over in New Zealand,
and he was pushing me
and said, I don't understand why the banks in New Zealand
have said that the usage of the rails can be for free,
uh, in the short term.
'cause his view as someone coming from a commissioner basis
is in order to have it as a thriving ecosystem,
actually there needs to be revenue, uh, that's made
and that's why you invest in systems.
But I think what we've done here is pragmatic.
In the short term, it doesn't make sense to charge
'cause the volumes are small,
but how we evolve that model, uh, needs to work
for all parties, which includes the FinTech,
but it also includes those that are having
to do the heavy lift on the technology
investment as well. Thank you.
Mm-hmm. Okay. Nancy, have you got another question,
Nancy? Yes, I, I do
have one more quick question is
around the realtime payments.
Um, and so the need,
I think, I think the, the key is where is the balance
between realtime payment?
I acknowledge that is relatively quick now
during working standard hours.
However, where is the balance
between quick real-time payment, which is
evidenced in some countries that it is possible to balance
with the risk and the fraud related
to the real-time payments.
Um, you noted in your answers here that um, you're open
to it, you're largely agnostic.
Uh, we see the mirror in doing this,
but banks need to come to the table and and sequence
and do this altogether.
Can you please elaborate on that
and whether maybe Westpac can
take some leadership in this too.
So I think one of the things we've gotta think about is
the use cases and benefits
that any hefty uplift in infrastructure provides.
So I think we process every 30 minutes at the moment in
New Zealand, which is very different to the UK
before they put faster payments in place.
Um, it wouldn't be beyond the realm of possibility to get
that same existing system, for example,
to process every 10 minutes.
I think it's important to have a pause both for consumers,
um, and for banks to make sure
that we can catch transactions that aren't intended to go.
And if I look at the uk, uh,
I don't think they've got the balance right.
Um, and I think that's got consequences for consumers.
'cause even if you get your money back, um, the shock
and pain and misery of having lost money to somebody
that you don't intend to for a period
of time is quite material.
And so I think we need to have a really
good discussion on open payment, on faster payments
that says what's the business case for it
and where will it make a difference?
Can we get to the same result
through using our existing rails and just speeding them up?
Um, and then how do we make sure we get that balance right?
One of the things that I thought was particularly
interesting, there was a industry-wide, um, scam
that particularly impacted business customers,
which we haven't seen a lot of those payments all went
to the country in the world
that has the fastest international, uh,
faster payments processing.
Mm-hmm. Um, and when you see all
of them being rooted into one particular jurisdiction
because of the speed at which that money can bounce out
and never be caught mm-hmm.
It makes you quite thoughtful about
the 10 minute pause versus the instant.
Very good follow up. Yep. That's okay.
Um, obviously thank you and thank you for being here.
And just, just to kind of follow up, yeah.
Obviously we now kind of have got the, um,
payee verification process.
How's that going? Yeah, I mean, yeah, just wanna,
if you could just give us a bit of an update from
Westpac's perspective on that.
Yep. 'cause obviously that does help pick up
that you are paying the right person. Yep. Yeah,
So I think two things have gone in, uh, that are helping
as part of fraud and scams prevention.
One is confirmation of, uh, payee.
We now appear to have other people visiting from
outside New Zealand to come
and see how we managed to do that
as an industry at the pace we did, which is great to see.
The other piece that's gone in is friction on payments,
which you might have noticed yourselves if you're looking
to make payments where you get asked more questions.
Mm-hmm. Um, and what we are seeing is
that can provide a little bit
of irritation sometimes if you just want a
payment, uh, to go through.
But we think it is helping on the entirety, um,
of the ecosystem where confirmation of PE can't help though,
as I still see scams, um, particularly some of those
that are originated off, um, marketplaces
or some of the social media platforms
where the scammers are very good at telling me
that you may think you're paying into Westpac investments,
but the money is going into Catherine McGraw Limited
for some very good reason.
And those scams confirmation of pay, you don't help
'cause you're convinced that that's the right one.
I think to further help New Zealanders, uh, on that,
there's more work to be done on the other constituent parts
where there are vulnerabilities in the system like taking
advertising money for investments where it's not Westpac.
Uh, I think it's easier for, uh, platforms to be able
to verify that an advertiser is
who they say it is than it is for me to identify
that a payment you think you're making to the right person
isn't actually the payment that you intend to make.
And so I think we need a stronger ecosystem approach.
Thank you. Mm. Okay. Thank you. Thank you for coming in.
Uh, Catherine McGraw, thank you and your team.
We appreciate it. And, uh, thank you for your submission
and we will no doubt see you again.
Thank you. Thanks for your time. Thanks very much.
Thank you. Okay. That now leads us to FMA.
Uh, we've got Sumatra here, so thank you
for being here in person as the chief executive
Pleasure.
Uh, as you'll, as members will know,
you've got 15 minutes, we welcome any introductory comments.
We are grateful for your, um,
written responses submitted well ahead of time.
Thank you. Thank you. Um, Koto Koto, Koto Couture, um,
thank you chair for inviting us to update you.
Uh, it's a few opening remarks by way of updating you on
where we have, uh, got to following the report in August.
Banking competition is absolutely critical to securing fair,
efficient, and transparent financial markets.
Um, we've been paying very close attention, uh, to the work.
Firstly, uh, I can confirm
that we are now publishing data on
how quickly banks are passing through, uh,
on official cash rate changes.
Um, this was an earlier concern that was raised
by the committee and we move quickly, um,
to deliver on our commitment
to the committee to address that.
And we've, uh, so, so that's the, and,
and that has, uh, that, that's going down very well
and is, is producing some useful practical data,
uh, for consumers.
Um, since your report, the FMA has progressed,
work on the three key recommendations in your report.
And I'll just quickly provide you a short update
and then can answer, uh, any questions.
First of all, regarding recommendation for review, fees
and profits on everyday accounts, we are continuing
to engage with MB to understand the government's approach,
uh, because it would be the, the, the propo.
The, um, approach is
for the government contact banks about the profitability
on transaction on call
and savings accounts, uh, with billions
of dollars potentially help.
We agree, um,
that Kiwis could well be missing out on their share on
interest earnings under cofi.
Uh, the, the big, uh, priority
for us are the product reviews in December.
And, and by the product reviews what I'm referring to,
there are, you know, a requirement for banks
to look at the product lines
and check that they are delivering to purpose in their,
and the costs and benefits
for their customers are working well.
Uh, in December, we published a thematic report
with some initial findings on
how banks are conducting their product reviews, uh,
to ensure that products meet customer needs.
And following this, we will be engaging with banks
during 2026 to understand
how banks are assessing the ongoing suitability
of transaction current and on-call accounts
and how they inform customers of the benefits
and costs of their accounts, including fees
and potential interest earnings.
So that's gonna be a big focus
for us throughout calendar year 2026.
On recommendation seven, the regulatory sandbox,
we expect four of the six firms
that are currently in the sandbox to be operational, uh,
by early, uh, early this year.
We grant the first license, uh, in December 25,
and we'll be confirming exact dates for the others as they,
um, as, as we work through with their business models
and exemption details.
The remaining two of the six in the sandbox are likely
to exit the commercial.
Uh, as a result of commercial decisions.
We've learned a lot from the regulatory sandbox pilot.
It showed us that handling exemptions
and licenses on a case by case basis isn't scalable.
Why is this important? It's important
because if we're going to foster innovation,
FinTech innovation, we need to be able
to reach more than six entities in, in the course of,
in the course of our work.
That's just so we have to have something that's scalable.
What we are doing to address that is to ex and,
and to, uh, explore a more diverse group
of cohorts is we're following the lead that's set in the uk
and we are looking throughout the course of this year,
we will be, uh, developing an on-ramp license, uh,
to allow entities to test their products in the market
before applying for a full license.
I'm happy to answer some questions about that.
And this will align with the work
to introduce a single licensing model that will be supported
by the financial markets and conduct, uh, amendment Act
that's going through the house at the moment.
And the focus of this will be
to consolidate our multiple market service licenses.
And finally, recommendation, uh, eight, the Council
of Financial Regulators COFA regulatory overlap.
Uh, it's very, you know,
reducing unnecessary regulatory burden,
simplifying obligations, important KOFA
Commission self commissioned a review at the beginning
of last year, uh,
and following that review, we are getting leaner
and sharper with a new operating model
that has significantly cut back on bureaucracy,
speeding up decision making.
We've disbanded non-critical COFA work streams
to enable resources to be redeployed.
Industry engagement though remains a priority.
The regulatory initiatives calendar
and in particular, making sure
that the regulatory initiatives calendar isn't just
producing information, but that is actively used
to make decisions on.
When we, when we, uh, take things through with the industry,
uh, is, um, is is being further strengthened, uh,
and as are the industry forums that we work with.
The operating model includes rather than ongoing, uh,
work streams, time-limited task forces on specific issues
that cannot be addressed by bilateral
or trilateral arrangements between the COVID industries.
And you've seen a recent example of that, uh,
through the announcement about 10, about week or
or so ago, working together to explore, uh, insurance,
insurance pricing and affordability.
And it will be particularly looking at the drivers
of premium increases
and how households are adjusting their
carbon response to that.
Uh, operationally we are
focusing our coordinated collaboration
on shared interest in a particular cyber
and operational resilience,
and we can get some real, um, reduction of burden,
thereby sharing intelligence
and information, uh, through, through the work that we do.
So, um, I'm gonna stop there.
I normally open these things with a short statement,
but as this is an update,
I just want you to kind of run through.
Yeah, no, thank you. The key,
the key developments. Okay. Very.
I'm gonna go to Ryan Hamilton, then I'm gonna go
to, uh, thanks Chair.
Um, thanks Samantha for your, um,
submission and report back.
And it's really pleasing to see obviously you've engaged
well with the recommendations
and that's good feedback on them.
Um, I was really interested in the sandbox trial in
particular and, uh, where you got with that.
And obviously, I guess my question is, you've,
you've developed an on-ramp license, well,
was was the existing license to, uh, not fit for purpose?
Is the on ramp, is it,
is it like a temporary license? How does it
Work? So
we will be, um, we are still in early scoping mode
for the on-ramp, uh, license.
We will be able to report back on where we have got to with
that at the end of this year.
Uh, the, it's it's,
Is it gonna take that long? Sorry.
We will, we will move as quickly as we can.
I mean, one of the reasons that we are looking at it is
that we had, uh, in that, that we sh we,
we actually had quite a lot of our frustration
inside the FMA that, uh,
we were only focusing on six entities within the sandbox.
And we could see from the engagement that we have had
with the FinTech industry in particular,
but not just the FinTech industry, that, uh, we need to move
as quickly as we can to broaden the, um, broaden what,
what we can do and make it very scalable.
So I'm, I'm, I'm not committing too much
to timing at this point.
Sure. But it will be by the end of this year at the latest.
So quick, quick, um, sort of side question. Yeah.
'cause I was digging through your submission then.
I saw you, you'd done a whole thing on tokenization. Yes.
And you'd gone out for submission last year.
Just really quickly, what was the feedback like on that?
Where's that moving in terms of the wider ecosystem? Yeah.
Uh, we had some really great feedback on,
on the tokenization, very supportive.
And we had a round table with the broader FinTech industry
on the back of that there.
The, the big outcome for us on that is to take care
that when we are looking at virtual assets,
that we don't do it product by product.
So tokenization is not the only, uh, product line, uh,
in, in what it can be offered in the virtual asset space.
So there is what we are thinking of what,
what we are working on in the thematic work
that we are doing is how can we address all
of the virtual asset, uh, or,
or all of the, how, how can we, all the combinations
and permutations that can present as opportunities
in the virtual, in the virtual asset space
and not just tokenization, I think was one
of the key, one of the key things. Fantastic.
Final question. Um, now,
'cause I'm assuming this is public.
Who was the entity that has been successful in granting
or getting the license in that sandbox?
The, I can come, I can come back to you.
That's okay On that, yeah.
On details, because we've got four, um, I think four
as I said, one, one that's one that's gone live.
And three more that will go.
Yeah, that'd be useful. Yeah. Thank, thank you.
Yeah, no, Mr. Hamilton's on homework today.
So Samantha, that's your job.
We're gonna go to, uh, Williams.
Um, similar interest in the regulatory sandbox.
'cause obviously this committee was very focused on, um,
the progress of open banking
and wanting that to be, um,
as successful as possible in New Zealand.
Uh, what has changed between what, uh, when you presented
to us last, um mm-hmm.
You helped us to understand what, um,
small fintechs were asking from FMA.
Mm-hmm. What are they now asking for?
Um, and,
and what has changed about their expectations of, um, the,
the larger banks and the way that they conduct themselves
with their rails banks and how they want you
to be playing a role within that?
Yeah, Fosh, I mean, that's a, that, that's a big question.
I mean, the things that we have, uh, things, things
that we have learned since we last spoke to you include,
I realize joint learning with the, um, with the fintechs
that we've been working with, that there is quite a lot
of work that needs to be done to, uh, make,
to develop their business model, uh, be and, and,
and really understand how their business model and, and,
and for us to support how it interacts with the broader,
with, with the, with the broader regulatory
and legal environment.
I, one of the profound, uh, implications, uh,
or learnings from the work,
and this has really led directly
to us looking at the on-ramp licensing is just
how difficult it is if you are a startup with a great idea.
It's not just our regulation
or another entity, it's, it's actually dealing
with the entire legal system
and regulatory system that you need to work through in order
to bring it to, in order to bring it to market.
And I think what we have learned, uh,
over the past year is there's that, that there's,
there's quite a big, there's there, there is quite a lot
to do and to get on top of and to,
and to be thoughtful on the implications of that,
because it doesn't mean
that you dismantle your regulatory framework.
Yeah. But what you do,
and this is what we, this is where our thinking is going
with the on-ramp licensing, is there are just, so,
there are just a lot of things
that are requirements if you are in, if you are, if, if,
if you are in the market, uh, as a long,
in the long-term basis for a firm on what's absolutely
necessary in the first 24 months.
So for example, you don't really need
to have an FMA regulated auditor to do your financial to,
to audit your financial accounts within the first 24 months.
This is an area that we can roll back on,
but there are some important areas of consumer protections
that, uh, need to be deployed as well during that time.
But they can, we can do it in a more, uh,
and we, we can, we can look at helping in a more, um, with,
in, in a way that kind of really means rather than looking
as we were doing with the sandbox at each bespoke business
model, what we've been able to do is to look at
where can our regulations be pulled back temporarily
for a limited period of time
to support the new innovation be brought to market.
Just, um, you, you do see that around the world, many
of the successful fintechs
that are in our market actually grow up in light touch
regulation environments.
Um, will the on-ramp license, um, be an avenue
to New Zealand growing sort
of the next weis the next revolution?
Um, if, you know, we currently have, um,
what is not the most permissive regulatory environment,
but which is sending all the right signals to, um, the,
the fintechs that they can grow here. Yeah.
Oh, completely. I mean, what, what we are, our ambition
with the on-ramp license is to support, uh, is, is
to be able to s support
significant enterprises being brought
to market in New Zealand.
Uh, I've got experience in previous, uh,
previous roles I've held with, uh,
bringing very large financial en ultimately very large
financial entities to market and looking in the OnRamp.
We didn't call it on-ramp, we called
it something else there.
But there are various ways in which you can, uh,
initially limit, for example,
you can focus your services on friends and family
or just staff, you know, limiting the number of consumers
that your services are exposed to.
What that does is it enables even some of the more, uh,
prudentially in conduct can, um, complex in terms
of the risks they present.
You can manage those risks
while they, while they take shape.
And that provides a really strong foundation for,
for a business, big business to grow.
Just one more. Um,
The, uh, since we heard from you last, um,
an issue which has surfaced is the major bank's, um, access
to get verified
and excluding other smaller players from that.
Are there other examples that you can point to
and, um, what are proprietary services
but that could be, um, could
otherwise be regulated that would give more
of these smaller players more access to the market?
Um, I'll come back to you on that. Okay.
Okay. David Wilson.
Um, one of the constraints I've bumped into talking
to fintechs is the capital constrained, you know,
small startups have gone past their friends falls
and families in terms of how they can finance this thing.
Um, and their large, um, you say dynamics in terms of
what they're trying to achieve.
And so they may onboard a large number of customers
and they also have to manage that
and they also have to launch growth somehow.
Yeah. So alongside that, we're seeing, um, the beginning
of some of these fintechs being invested in
by the major banks, which immediately makes me think
that perhaps that com competitive environment is not as, um,
competitive as it could be.
Your comments on that.
Uh, so I think that's where, in terms
of understanding the source of capital and any of the, uh,
and, and any of the risks
or opportunities that may arise from that is, is a, a matter
that we need to look at on a case by case basis.
But also it's the, an area where we would look, for example,
but working very closely with the reserve bank
as the prudential, it's the prudential
Regulator. So it's
still an issue.
It's just gro enabling the gro, which of those fintechs,
which is what this Yeah.
Inquiry is about for in enlarged Yeah.
Part of increasing competitiveness.
I'm, I'm not a real, uh, you know,
I'm not necessarily a sticking to your knitting kind of, uh,
chief executive at all,
but what we, there's quite a lot of things
that we simply can't influence.
We can't, but what we can do
that could have a secondary effect as far as
broadening the range of, um, attractiveness of an entity
to broader range of capital is
to look at things like on-ramp licensing.
How can we, how can we streamline, uh,
that particular cost, uh,
and effort involved in coming to market?
If, if that can be more streamlined, then,
then it is perhaps as an entity, as an investment,
uh, more attractive to broader range.
I think this is probably where Ryan was going as well
with your regulatory sandbox, you know, the experience
that you're gaining and connecting
with the private sector this way mm-hmm.
Is gonna be valuable to us. Yeah.
We, we are really enjoying it.
Okay. Dan, Good to see you again.
Um, Westpac had a really good diagram in their submission
around the overlap between all the various agencies, um,
you know, all the duplication.
And I'm wondering with your hat as a co-chair of the Council
of Financial Regulators, who is holding the pen regarding
saying and determining, okay, R-R-B-N-Z,
you are gonna do that.
We'll stop doing this compound. You'll do that.
We'll stop doing this. Who's actually holding
the 10 in that process?
So two co-chairs of cofa, uh, which for me is
where the leadership on the outcomes that we are looking
for from regulatory duplication Yes.
Are me as Chief executive of the FMA
and Anna Breman as governor of the Reserve Bank.
And I would, I do expect
and anticipate it's one of the outcomes
that I've been looking for when we initiated the COFA review
is to be actively, as I said
before, actively working to look at areas of duplication
where even if it's just sequencing things, uh, differently
or, or over a more manageable time, hair does need
to be some things that can look
as though they're duplicating activity are,
there's a difference between sequencing
and understanding what each other's doing.
They, but the risks as a conduct regulator
that you are looking at in a bank
or insurance company are different to the prudential risks.
And sometimes there can be a conflict
between managing prudential risk
and managing conduct risk there.
Uh, it may well be that, uh, if there are, if, if,
if there is a danger of risks crystallizing, uh,
that an entity may see both the Reserve bank
and the FMA in a room at the same time, our aim is
to make sure that Absolutely.
And we do work very closely together. Mm-hmm.
Uh, but some of the, our areas of interest can be different
and they both, and they, they need to be well managed
between our two institutions. Yeah.
Um, just to follow up if I can, Mr.
Chair, um, you know, they, they talked about a,
an an example of, um, resilience at the bank
and how they'll often get approached by multiple agencies
multiple times around understanding resilience
and multiple, you know, same person.
Um, so I guess what, what level
of interaction will you be having from the banks around
what's actually a gripe for them
and, you know, what can we actually collect once
and then share amongst our agency? Yeah,
That's a totally fair.
I mean, that, that's, that's a totally fair question,
which we should be getting.
Right? I mean, one of the themes is operational resilience
and it should be entirely possible for us
to avoid the outcome of multiple people going along
and asking the same questions. Yeah.
Thank you. Great. Just, just one from me.
Um, on our recommendation four, which was
around reviewing fees and profits on everyday accounts.
Mm-hmm. I know that you said, um, that you are continuing
to work on work with mb uh,
to understand the government's approach to this.
Uh, after its, um, response, uh, government response
to our inquiry on the 13th of November,
our recommendation was quote, we recommend
that the FMA investigate transaction account pricing.
Is that something you are committed to doing?
We do not have plans to ask banks for data around pricing,
what we are working on with banks, uh,
because that's that what we are working on with banks,
which is, which almost could be seen potentially as a prior,
is to understand, uh, what, what are they, what,
what are they doing to be able to explain both to us
and to their customers the costs
and benefits, uh, of the, um, of, of transaction accounts.
And to, under our, our immediate focus is on product, the,
the product reviews
and are the banks conducting in a proactive way a review
of their, uh, a review of their transaction savings
and, uh, on-call accounts.
And, and the rea it's, it's a big exercise we do.
I'm not saying we wouldn't get to that point.
We're also working with the Reserve Bank to see
what information they hold about
transaction account balances.
It's a lot of, we need to think quite carefully
before we ask for a whole load of data from that.
Yeah, sure. And is that, is that work this year
that you are committed to publishing publicly too?
We will be publishing at the end.
So in the way, same way that we published other results
of our first cofi Yeah.
Thematic review in December last year.
We will be publishing the results of the work
that we're doing this year at the end of this year.
And I'd be happy to contact back to committee
Talk. Feel free about it. Feel, add us
to the Yeah, that's great.
Email. Just lemme do that. Okay. Hey, thank you.
Thank you so much for Thank you.
Uh, your generosity of time and Oh, thank you. Your answers.
Thank you. Okay.
That leads us to our last, um, submitter, uh, for today
as far as our catch up on the banking inquiry.
And that's, uh, Roy Childry.
Roy, I hope you appreciated that.
When I quoted, quoted you
as saying the banks were not giving the FinTech sector
enough support or engagement, uh,
to Catherine McGraw that I didn't name you.
'cause you were sitting there and I thought you might have
been swiped as she walked out.
Did appreciate the question, Chad, but
that point was well made in your submission.
So we look forward to your, uh, to the next few minutes.
Thank you Keala chair, members of the committee.
Uh, thank you for the opportunity to make the submission.
My comments relate to three key areas relevant
to the FinTech and banking sector, competition
and market access, customer outcomes,
and operational resilience and risk.
But before I get to the main submission,
just allow me one minute to just explain what we do.
Over the past 18 months, my team
and I have built a New Zealand based
FinTech platform called Homely.
Homely enables home loan customers to contact directly
with the banks and lenders without mortgage brokers
or financial advisors.
We use AI and open banking
to streamline the mortgage application process.
Customers can complete a full credit application
and apply to multiple lenders under 10 minutes.
This is the first platform of its kind in New Zealand.
At its core, homely is about giving customers more
transparency, more choice, more control,
so they can compare competing offers
and select the best options for their needs.
Homely aims to create a level playing field
between large banks and smaller lenders.
Lenders compete based on pricing product features
and service without any advisor driven bias.
This aligns strongly with the Commerce Commission's 2024
Stallion personal banking, which called
for reducing structural barriers
and empowering consumers through transparency and choice.
In addition to empowering the borrowers
and creating transparency, homely returns part
of the income we earn back to the customers
through rewards on top
of any cash back offered by the lender.
Customers are typically hundreds
of dollars better off compared
to using a traditional broker.
We also charge banks materially lower success fees
and then advisor channels, which translates to lower cost
of acquisition, which we hope could ultimately be passed
back to the customers through improved pricing
or additional cashbacks.
Homely could potentially reduce lenders cost to serve by up
to 70% through automation and standardization.
This improves operational resilience
and reduces manual processing friction and error risk.
It also significantly shortens the turnaround time so
that they can approve launch faster.
And my main submission around barrier to entry
and competition, uh, despite clear benefit the customer
to the customers and the system,
the biggest challenge we face is
access to the banking market.
After months of discussions, we are still waiting
for meaningful participation from the
banks in our lender panel.
This raises a fundamental question.
If customer outcomes are truly a priority for the banks,
why do fintechs that improve those outcomes struggle
to gain market access?
This is not unique to us
through my involvement in an accelerator program
with 14 other New Zealand FinTech companies
and ongoing engagement across the FinTech sector,
the common experiences slow, uncertain
and often stall engagement with the banks.
The usual explanation given to us is limited capacity
or busy change calendars,
which impact is blocks collaboration.
What is often more baffling is that smaller banks
and non-bank lenders who are often vocal about competition
and fair market access are also reluctant to engage
and take advantage of competing
with the larger banks on equal footing.
That suggests a broader structural issue, a reluctance,
reluctance to compete transparently in an
open market environment.
My conclusion and requests New Zealand has a strong ambition
to lead in financial innovation
and we have an emerging ecosystem
of high quality FinTech startups,
but our ambition must match with action.
FinTech industry is global and aggressively growing.
Global companies like Wise Revolut
and Air Wall are already in our backyard gaining
market share in New Zealand.
If local FinTech cannot access the domestic market
and scale quickly, we risk losing the opportunity
to build globally competitive New Zealand companies.
Keeping that in mind, our respectfully request
that the committee considers introducing annual reporting
requirements for banks on how they engage with local FinTech
and include metrics such as the number
of pilots initiated each year, the proportion that progress
to commercial deployment
and the average time taken from
engagement to implementation.
Many banks publicly sponsor FinTech initiatives,
but real collaboration remains extremely difficult in
practice, greater accountability is needed.
So public display of support transl us
into measurable outcomes.
Supporting FinTech
that improves customer outcome is not only good
for consumers, it is essential for long-term competition,
resilience, and innovation in new financial system.
Thank you for your time and consideration
and I'm open for questions.
Oh, very good. Thank you. Um, Roy, we're gonna go
to Ryan Hamilton.
Oh, thank you for your submission, Roy.
Um, it's really good to see you engaging in the,
the process, but obviously like, um, uh,
Adrian from Blink Pay,
you're also on the bleeding edge in terms
of coming into some
of the challenges and that sort of thing.
Um, how has your experience been with, uh, are you
with a particular bank
or you you're actually just floating
across the complete market?
We're engaged with 10 lenders so far, none of them
with return assigned contract
and make sorts of excuses for not engaging.
Um, no one has said it's a bad idea.
The customer outcome is very well proven.
Um, they simply wanna engage.
It's very difficult to engage with them
and to get them meaningful. Outcome
Is part of your challenge with your business,
not only dealing with the banks,
but dealing with individuals as they learn the new
technology and the customer data, right.
And that sort of aspect of it?
Uh, yes, it is.
Uh, it it, it it is a quite a novel solution.
Uh, and banks are still kind of catching up with the idea
of ai, open banking interplay, um,
but it is all about trying
and leading rather than, you know,
having a mentality of follow the crowd.
Yeah. Uh, we think that,
I think personally we are at an inflection point with ai,
open banking regulations such as CDR coming together.
It's, it's a once in a generation opportunity. Mm-hmm.
And if you miss that opportunity, I mean,
let's put into context, we are already two years late on
open banking, so we are still catching up
and if we spend another two years to unlock the potentials
of the FinTech, we've lost the plot. Yeah.
Thank you. Okay. I've gotta sub there from Dan bid.
Hey Roy. Thanks. I'm just looking at your website.
Pretty, uh, pretty innovative company,
so, um, well done on that.
I, um, just wanna ask, I guess in terms of carrot
and stick, I mean, we can, we can be, uh, we can
provide the, um, stick through regulation
or there's the carrot in terms of the incentive
for the banks to engage with.
You could just walk us through, I mean, what do,
do the banks win out on this?
If, if they engage with you, how,
what's your pricing strategy like?
Do they, how do you, I guess you clip a ticket in terms
of the rate.
Mm-hmm. How does, how does your business model work?
Yep. So I, I have 20 years of banking experience myself,
so I understand the bank's pain point.
This is a platform which was complementing
banks not going against them.
The whole idea, because apparently a problem,
and it's not just New Zealand problem, I was in UK,
Singapore, there's a culture
of rewarding intermediaries than the customer.
The entire gravity train is actually
because of the customers,
but there's very little reward coming to the customers.
There's a lot of rewards coming to the intermediaries.
I mean, the fact that we have a 93% market share
of five major banks is not by accident.
There are some marketplace market makers in play.
So our aim is to reduce that kind of lower that barrier so
that our customers directly can connect with the banks
of all sizes, shapes, and colors, uh,
and live the choice to the customers rather than some
individual biases that currently exists.
What we have done is by, through automation,
through technology, we've lowered the cost of acquisition
for the banks with the expectation
that those rewards will be passed back to the customer.
Now, whether they'll do it actually on reality agreeable,
but it is very much possible,
so they're increasing their cost of acquisition,
we expect the savings should be passed onto the customers.
For example, our acquisition,
our success fee is literally half of
what they pay to the brokers.
Mm-hmm. So our, um, what we are advocating is that
that cost saved, don't just book it into your profit, pass
that back to the first home buyers
or in terms of rewards, I mean,
it's a significant amount of money.
Um, I mean, for a first time buyers to get a thousand,
$2,000 more means it's new couch or tele television,
and we are advocating that,
but no one's kind of said yes to that yet.
Is it just 'cause banks are risky
and you're just too innovative at the moment?
Or, um, you know, I see somebody, you,
the smaller banks you're, you're trying to engage with.
Mm-hmm. What's the reaction been like from smaller banks?
Um, it's really, uh, um, interesting actually.
We would've thought it's a no brainer.
They'd say, I get to compete
with the big boys in the equal footing.
But no, they say, oh, my product is not competitive enough
and my interest rate isn't attractive,
and now I can't, I can't change that for the banks.
That's the, in internal, uh, policies,
what we can do is put them into the same, uh, you know,
platform against the big banks.
So there's been, you know, quite a bit of hesitation
for them to come to the platform as well
and including, um, one of them, one of the banks
that government supports.
And, um, I'm, I'm really surprised why is that?
Yeah. Hey, thank you. Cheer. Yeah.
Have, have you seen the banks, uh, in the last year
or two certainly lift their, um, marketing
and promotion around the, the ease of, um,
lending from them direct IE going out to the marketplace,
going out to consumers
and the speed that banks might are promoting
that they might be able to turn
around a mortgage application?
Are you seeing that? Are, are they,
have fintechs forced them
to pull up their socks internally like that?
Again, I haven't, I'm not, I mean, I know
that there has been some media
that their banks are struggling with a lot of work volumes,
and as a result, the turn turnaround time is taking longer.
But on the bank, on the bank's side,
obviously they're claiming that they're faster.
So who do we believe? But, um, I know for a fact
that the banks, they have got real challenges to move faster
because of certain manual processes
and all of lack of automation.
And that is the problem we are trying to solve.
So the whole idea of the solution is all the efficiencies
that we have created using ai,
open banking eventually gets transferred across
to their workflow so that they can give decision faster.
They can, the first time they see the customer they have,
they can make an informed choice of whether
to touch the customer or not.
So there's a lot of, um, effort wastage within the system.
Like the co the banker spends a lot of time
with the customer processes, the application,
and then the right at the end they find out
that there's a credit, you know,
credit score is not acceptable.
So the entire wastage we are trying
to eliminate from the system
and that will translate into better productivity,
cost savings, and faster decision making.
Mm-hmm. Okay. Yeah, no, very good.
And you are just highlighted your point to finish on as far
as the role that you play as, uh, as complimentary.
Mm-hmm. Yes. Um, yeah.
So, um, as I said, this is,
so there is already an established process.
We are not reinventing the wheel.
Uh, there's already brokers sending application
and then the banks look at that.
What we are saying is that,
and currently the broker market share is about 60%,
so we are saying we are not even competing with the broker.
This is a platform we are creating for the other 40% that
who are currently not using the broker and a tool,
and they have to currently go
and it's not a repeatable process.
So they can, you can make an application with the bank, go
through the entire process, and if it doesn't work out,
you have to do the entire
thing all over again with another bank.
So it's not repeatable. What we are doing is making
that process a lot more repeatable
and efficient so that at one point they can go
to five different banks and get a,
so banks are literally competing for the business
and that is good for the consumers.
Yeah. Very good. Okay.
No, thank you for your very crystal clear, uh, submission.
Roy, thank you. At homely. Yeah.
And we wish you all the best with the endeavors
and keep us in touch with how you're getting
on. Will do. Thank
You. Thank you very much. Thanks.
And the likes. Thank you.
Thank you. Okay.
Members, that now ends our, uh, public session.
Uh, and we will have more, uh, banking inquiry follow ups,
um, uh, next week.
And so we will keep you abreast as to that, um, timetable,
uh, of appearances, the likes of a NZ and others.
Okay. Mr. Clark.